Beyond the Glass Mountain Someone had left a funny paper in the booth, and while he waited with his ear intent on the regular buzzing rings, Mark let his eye follow the pictured squares. I know somebody that likes your new hat, Emmy, Kayo's balloon said, and Emmy's pleased balloon said, Well, for thirty­nine-fifty they ought to, who is he? and Kayo's balloon said lt's Beefy McGuire, he'd like it for his bird's nest collection, and on the fourth ring the line clicked and Mel's inquiring voice said, "Hello?" The voice was as familiar as yesterday, a voice whose wire-filtered flatness Mark had heard over telephones ten thousand times. The rising hairs prickled on the back of his neck; he felt as he might have felt if a door had opened and the face of someone long dead had looked casually out. And he noted instantly, in refutation of his fears, that the voice was sober. He found himself leaning forward, grinning into the mouthpiece. "Hello, you poop-out," he said. "This is Canby." 
The old password came naturally, as if he were back seventeen years. In their college crowd everybody had called everybody else Canby, for no reason except that someone, probably Mel, had begun it and everyone else had followed suit. There had been a real Canby, a sort of goof. Now he was a CP A in Denver, and the usurpers of his name were scattered from coast to coast.
"Well, Canby!" the filtered voice said heartily. "How's the boy?" There was a pause. Then Mel's voice, more distorted now, beginning to be his clowning voice, said suspiciously, "What was that name again?" 
"Canby," Mark said. "Cornelius C. Canby." He raised his head, grinning and waiting for the real recognition. "Cornelius C. Canby?" Mel's thickening, burbling voice said. "I didn't get the name." "It's a hell of a note," Mark said. "Your old friend Canby was here, and you didn't even get the name." Mel's voice was thick as glue now, like something mired down, except that on occasional syllables it fluttered upward like a mud-heavy hird. It was a maudlin, wandering, caressing voice, very convincing to strangers and drunks, and it always made any drunk his instant pal. "Canby?" it said. "D'you say Canby? Cornelius Canby? Well my God. Wonnersnevercease. Canby, after all these years! Come on over here and shake my band. Where are you? Hire a car. Wait a minute, 1'11 come and get you myself."
"Don't bother," Mark said. "I can walk over in five minutes." He grinned again into the mouthpiece. "Are you at home or out at some bar?" 
"Just down at the corner pub having little drink," Mel said. "But l'11 be home in minute, home quick as you are. Not far away." There was another pause. "What was z'name?" Mark was beginning to feel a shade uncomfortable. The clowning was routine, but there was a point where it should have stopped. It left things uncertain. "You stinker," he said, "this is Aker. Remember me?" The drunken voice was an amazed buzz in the earpiece. Out of the buzz words formed. "Y ou mean Belly Aker, the basketball player, erstwhile holder of the Big Ten scoring record?" 
"The same." 
"Not Mark Aker, the eminent penicillinologist?" 
"It is he." 
"Well my God," Mel said. "I remember you. Seen your name in the Alumni Magazine." The words degenerated into a buzz, then became articulate again. "You old spore-picker. How's boy?" Then in a moment the earphone bellowed, "What the hell you standing around there for?" "Hold it," Mark said. "I'm on my way." 
He hung up and stepped out of the booth self-consciously, looking around to see if anyone had been close enough to hear the nonsense he had been talking. As he walked through the drugstore and out into the street he found himself explaining as if to some critical stranger. Just to listen to Cottam, you' d think he was a maudlin sot, but that' s just a manner he wears. He puts it on for the same reason some people put on dark glasses ....
He found himself at the corner of College and Dubuque Streets in Iowa City, at a little past ten on a Sunday morning in May, and as he stopped on the corner to let a car pass, the utter and passionate familiarity of everything smote him like a wind. Mel's voice on the wire had prepared him for nostalgia. Now the past moved up on him in a wave; it was as if he had never left here, or had just awakened from a long confused dream and found the solid and reassuring edge of reality again. The brick street ran warm and empty down across the powerhouse bridge and up the other side, curving under big elms and hickories. On the crown of the hill across the river the Quadrangle's squat ivied towers barely topped the trees, and over on the other hill to the right the stone lace of the hospital tower rose above the massive rectangularity of the medical buildings. The lawns below Old Capitol were almost deserted, and the locusts were shrilling in the streetside trees. Odd compulsions moved him. He found himself reciting the names of all the main university buildings. Crossing the river, he ran his band along the cool cement rail as if establishing a contact, and halfway across he looked back to see how the union and the reserve library strung out along the riverbank, and the footbridge arched across to the experimental theater. The banks of the river had been landscaped since his time, but otherwise he saw no change. The highway traffic west poured across the Iowa Avenue bridge, and the law commons clung to the limestone bluffs. Mark looked curiously at the few students he met, wondering if they felt as he felt the charm and warmth that lay in the brick streets and the sleepy river and the sun-warmed brick and stone of the university. Probably no one appreciated things like that until they were gone and lost and irretrievable. On his left as he stepped off the bridge he saw the little eating shack where he and Mel had had long johns and coffee practically every morning for four years. The mere look of its outside, patched with Coke signs and Baby Ruth signs and Chesterfield signs, filled his nostrils with the peculiar and unique odors of the place: coffee and smoke and slightly rancid fat, oily-sweet doughnuts and baked paint and the reek of the bug­spray they used on the cockroaches, and under all the watery, tarry, wet­mud smells of the river. The metal rasping of the seventeen-year-locusts rose loud as a crescendo in a symphonic poem as he climbed the hill, and it struck him as amusing that he too should return here at the end of exactly seventeen years. He couldn't quite imagine where those years had gone; it did not seem that either he or the town had changed a particle. The tennis courts he passed reflected hundreds of remembered mornings like this, and in the field house beyond them were whole lifetimes of recollection. He would have liked to go in under the big round roof just to soak himself in the sensations he remembered: smell of lockers opened on stale gym clothes and stiff sweated socks; steam and thumping radiators and liquid soap smell; sweat and medicated foot baths and the chlorine smell and the jiggly reflecting chemical blue of the pool; splat of naked feet on concrete, pink of bare flesh, lean bellies and tiptoe bunching calves, the bulging triceps of the gymnastics team working out on the horses. Most of all, the barnlike cold of the basketball floor, and the tiny brittle feeling of coming out before a game to warm up in front of that crowd-faced emptiness, and the dubbing roar of crowd-sound as you drove in for a set-up. It was the same roar whether you made it or missed it. All of it was still there-unimaginably varied smells and sounds and sights that together made up the way he had once lived, the thing he had once been, perhaps the thing he still was. He was in all of it, and Mel with him. It came to him like a pang that never since the days when he and Mel used to fool around after lunch in the Quad cafeteria, throwing rolled-up paper napkins at water tumblers, had he had a completely relaxed and comfortable ability to enjoy himself. They had made games out of everything; whole Sunday mornings they had spent throwing curves with pot covers in Mel's mother's kitchen. In those Damon-and­Pythias days there had been a sharp and tingling sense of identity and one intense and constant comradeship, and those were the best days of his life. Passing the field house, he passed himself and Mel as they had used to be, and the feeling that he had not merely lived it but was somehow contained in it was as pervasive as the mild spring morning, as insistent as the skirring of the locusts. It was like skywriting on the big warm sky. The light over the whole hill was pure, pale, of an exaggerated clarity, as if all the good days of his youth had been distilled down into this one day, and the whole coltish ascendant time when he was eighteen, nineteen, twenty, had been handed back to him briefly, intact and precious. That was the time when there had been more hours in the day, and every hour precious enough so that it could be fooled away. By the time a man got into the high thirties the hours became more frantic and less precious, more needed and more carefully hoarded and more fully used, but less loved and less enjoyed. Then he was pushing the doorbell button, bracing himself obscurely for something-for joy? for recognition? for a renewed flood of this potent and unexpected nostalgia?-and the door opened. Mel stood there in his shirt sleeves, a little mussy as usual, still deceptively round-armed and round-faced, with his beaked nose and his tender child's mouth. He was either drunk or playing drunk. He sn1irked, and his eyes blinked in owlish amazement. "Let me shake your band!" he said, and hauled Mark inside. Tamsen got up off the couch where she had been sitting with a highball in her hand. As she came forward, smiling, transferring the glass to her left hand, Mark noted how she adjusted her face for greeting. She was probably prettier than she had ever been, her hair in a long bob with sun-bleached streaks in it, her face smoothly tanned, her eyes candid, her smile white and frank. Presumably the two of them had been drinking together, but where Mel was frowsy and blinking, with red-streaked eyeballs, she was smooth and sober and impeccable. "Of all the unexpected people!" she said, and gave him a firm hand. She left him in no doubt who was in command in this familiar house, who had established dominance. Mel's hand pulled him around. "Canby, you old snake in the grass, where you been? I've tried to call you up every night for ten years." "You did," Mark said. "Twice. Once in New Haven and once in New York. Both times at two in the morning." 
Tamsen laughed. "Old Melly," she said, almost as if affectionately. 
"Every time he gets tight he wants to call somebody up. The further away they are, the more he wants to call." Mel was standing spraddling, a little flickering smile on his mouth. One band was on Mark's shoulder. With the other he captured Mark's right band again and shook it slowly. His breath was heavy with whiskey, and Mark felt dismayed and half sick. He had been so sure at first that the thickening voice had been put on as part of the old clowning aet. Now he was bothered precisely as he had been bothered by those telephone calls. Even while he laughed at the ponderous solemnity, the incoherent, bumbling, repetitive nonsense, the marvelously accurate imitation of a soggy drunk, Mark backed away, because he couldn't be quite sure that the aet was conscious any more. The aet had become the man, and he went around living and acting out a grotesque parody of himself; or if it hadn't become the man, then it had been put on defensively so much that communication was no longer possible. Nothing had come of those telephone calls except a mumble of doubletalk and affectionate profanity, and yet Mark felt that there had been in each instance a need, a loneliness, a reaching out. He felt that there was the same thing now, it Mel would let it show. The old comradeship was there; this drunken parody was embarrassment as much as anything, the defense of a thin­skinned organism. "Been peeking down those microscopes," Mel said solemnly, pumping Mark's band. "You biological old pot-licker. D'you invent penicillin?" "I'm a modest man," Mark said. "Two or three other people helped." He got his band free, and as his eyes crossed Mel's there was almost communication between them, a flash of perfectly sober understanding and warmth. Mel's delicate, bruised-looking lips pursed, but then the look slipped and was gone, and he was pawing for Mark's band again, saying, "Canby, you old Rhodes Scholar, slip me the grip." Tamsen was amused. "Y ou should charge him. Remember when he paid a barfly a dollar an hour to shake his band down at Frank's?" "Kept me poor," Mel said, with a sweet imbecilic grin. "Lose all your friends, got to buy more." He smiled into Mark's face, hanging to band and shoulder, and Mark looked deep behind that idiot alcoholic smile trying to compel expression of what he knew was there: the recognition and the pain. Mel beamed at him. Tamsen too was staring, tipping her head sideways. "I can't get over how much you've changed," she said. "You used to be such a string bean." "Cheer up," Mark said. "I'm still a string bean at heart." 
"No fooling," Mel said. He plucked the cloth of Mark's sleeve, sniffed his fingers. "Where' d you get that j acket?" "Montreal," Mark said, and immediately felt an obscure guilty shame, as if he had been betrayed into boasting, rubbing in the faet that he had gone up and out in the world and Mel had been marooned behind. "I was up there a couple weeks ago at a genetics conference," he said lamely, in extenuation. For an instant he was furious at Mel, so furious he shook. In college it had been Mel who had everything-money enough, and clothes, and a car, and a home where starveling students could come like grateful sidling dogs off the street. And he had been brought up well, he had good parents, his home was full of music and books and a certain sense of social grace and personal responsibility. Mel had taught the whole unlicked lot of them something, how to win and how to lose, how to live with people and like them and forgive them. He had never owned a dime's worth of anything that he wasn't glad to share. Now the shoe was on the other foot. N ow Mark had gone higher and farther than any of them had ever aimed, and it embarrassed and enraged him to know that he could give lessons to Mel. And it was unjust that having shared everything for four years in college, they couldn't share this trouble that Mel was in now. Tamsen's level blue eyes were inspecting him, and it struck him that here at least was something they had never shared. He had always known more about Tamsen than Mel had. When he stood up as Mel' s best man he could have told the bridegroom the names of four people who had slept with the bride. He wished now that he had; he had wished it a hundred times. And catching Tamsen's eyes, twinkling with a little spark of malice, he knew she understood precisely what he was thinking. She had always been shrewd, and she had been all her life one of the world's most accomplished and convincing liars. When she went after Mel she had fooled even the people who knew her best, made them believe she was infatuated. . .. "I tell you for sure," she said, "if you'd been as good looking then as you are now I'd never have let old Melly take me in to church." "Maybe there's still time," Mark said. 
Mel's tugging hand hauled him around. "You've changed, you know that, you damn Y ale professor?" "So have you," Mark said, but his attempt to hold Mel's eye was unsuccessful, and he added, "I stay in nights, now. Once I got free of your influence I steadied right down." "That's faet," Mel said. "Terrible influence. Half stiff ten-thirty Sunday morning. Blame that boy of mine. Got his old man out playing baseball with a hangover before breakfast. Y ou ever meet that boy?" "N ever did." 
"Where is he, Tam?" 
"He's around," Tamsen said. "How about me getting you two a drink?" Mark let her go. It was a way of getting Mel alone. It seemed to him that some of the drunken pose fell away from Mel as soon as his wife left the room. He looked into the streaked eyes and shook his head and grinned. "How are things going, anyway?" The eyes were round and innocent. "Things going wonderful. I run the business now, since my dad died. My dad was a good business man, you know that, Canby?" "I know that," Mark said. "It wasn't business I was thinking about." With a quick estimate that he might have only two minutes more before Tamsen returned, he opened his mouth to say what he had come to say, and found that his tongue wouldn't go around it. In that instant it was clear that you did not come in on an old friend and say, "I hear your wife's been playing around with a golf pro. I could have warned you about her that way. Probably I should have. But I hear you found out all right, and were all set to get a divorce. Bailey told me that much, a year ago. Then I heard that instead of getting a divorce you went down to St. Louis, you and Tamsen and the boy, and stayed six months, and came back home and no more said about any divorce. Get rid of her. She'll cheat on you all her life, and break you in the process. If she's pulled some lie out of the bag and convinced you that you were mistaken, don't believe it, she could lie her way out of hell. For the love of God, get that divorce, for the sake of the boy and for your own sake. She'll suck you dry like an old orange skin. You're already so far gone I could cry­soggy with alcohol and with that comedy-routine front on all the time. Come and stay with me, I'll line you up with Alcoholics Anonymous if you want. Give me a chance to pay same of what I owe you." Y ou simply did not say things like that. Even thinking about them made them sound self-righteous and prying. Instead, you looked uneasily at your oldest and closest friend, trying to surprise in his eyes the things you knew were there, pain and shame and bitterness and defeat. But there was tao thick an insulating layer between. Seventeen years were too many. Mel was like the elk in Jim Bridger's Yellowstone story. He grazed on the other side of the glass mountain, clear and undistorted, looking only a hundred yards away. The hunter's gun went off, and the elk didn't even raise his head, didn't even hear the report. He just went on grazing, with blankness like a membrane over his eyeballs and an unpierceable transparent wall between him and the world. Mel's lips twitched. He lurched forward, looking puzzled and solicitous. "Whazza name?" he said, besotted and polite, and turned his ear sideward like a deaf man. Mark pushed him away angrily just as Tamsen came in with glasses. Mel took two and handed one to Mark with a crooked grin. "Here, rinse your mouth," he said. Tamsen raised her glass. "Here's to the local boy who made good." They clicked glasses elaborately all around. Irritated, baffled, frustrated, gnawed by that odd obscure shame, Mark drank with them to himself. "I was thinking about you the other day," Tamsen was saying. "We were down watching the spring canoe race and two kids went over the falls by the power plant just the way you and Mel did once." "I hope they didn't swallow as much water as I did," Mark said. 
"Yeah, but this the other day was an accident," Mel said. "You, you pot-licker, you put us over there just to duck me." "I was along," Mark said. "I went over too. Remember?" Tamsen shook her head. "You were a pair," she said. "I guess l'd forgotten what a pair you were." They sat nursing their drinks, the door open upon the street and the 
