
SOMEONE

door, and then the suddenly arrested sound of human chattergave way at once to the collective intake of breath when thoseassembled on the sidewalk saw that the stretcher contained abody covered from toe to head-only a slip of Pegeen's sloppyhair showing beneath.From the opened door behind the second ambulance man,Mrs. Chehab's cry was a spiraling wail. Most of the women, andmany of the men in the street, blessed themselves. My motherput a rough hand to my shoulder and then pulled my face intoher apron, which was still a little damp from last night's washingup. All instinct, I shut my eyes and wrapped my arms around mymother's waist, gripping the apron, the rough wool of her skirt,nestling into that familiar darkness and feeling the suddenwarmth of my brother's two hands as he pressed them againstmy ears, trying to spare me the sound of the women's prayersand exclamations, ofMrs. Chehab's lament, of the slam and theslam again of the ambulance's broad doors.All of which, nevertheless, I heard.It was the next evening that we walked in solemn stillness up thesteps of the Chehabs' house and into the crowded living room. Itwas painful, the way my mother gripped my hand as we madeour way through that forest of adults, all red knuckles, for me,and wedding bands and the hems of jackets, until the figures suddenlyparted and there before the glass of the bay window was thegleaming box and Pegeen in its satin bed. She wore her whitegraduation dress, and her red confirmation rosary was threadedthrough her still fingers. There was a single taper beside Pegeen'shead, its light reflected in the black window in such a way that,for a moment, I believed her thin and waxy nose now bore its ownflameI felt a pair of large hands slip themselves under my arms,warm and strong. And then I was aloft. Tue light grew brighter
the poem as my brother recited them, and then, once more, myparents were quietly applauding.My brother said, "'Ozymandias,"' as I lifted my teacup again.I felt my mother's finger against my thigh, a quick poke to remindme to listen.I listened, my eye on the lovely, tea-soaked dregs of sugarat the bottom of the china cup. I imagined it was the very samesweet, silver sand mentioned in the poem, desert sand, sand ofSyria and Mount Lebanon. I watched with one eye squinted asthe lovely stuff moved slowly across the ivory light, advancedsluggishly toward my tongue, and then, when it was too slow,the tip of my finger. I was thinking of a baby wrapped in sparklingclothes, being pushed slowly in a white carriage, slowlythrough the city of light, toward Brooklyn, when I felt the stingof a slap against the back of my head and then its quick echo ofpain. I pulled my finger from the cup. My mother hadn't raisedher eyes from her lap.Gabe finished the poem and returned to his place at the tableto drink down the cold tea and devour whole the bit of cake, hisface flushed with his triumph. Patiently, my mother turned tome to ask what would happen if a teacup shattered while myfingers were inside it.Some neighbor or faceless relation was named, a silly girlwho' d "sliced herself good" with her hand inside a glass whileshe was washing up. A suggested image of soapy dishwater darkenedwith blood following me to the bath, where I watched mymother's blurred red hand as it tested the seamless stream ofsteaming water.I deployed all my excuses in a rush: the water was too hot,the house too cold, l'd had a bath last week, I had a stomachache,I was sleepy. But my mother had a grip on my arm, and mythin legs were all obedience. They raised themselves against my
she herself had done when she was seventeen, wearing threeskirts and four blouses and carrying only a purse so her stepfather,a terrible man, would not know she was leaving home.At the harbor, Mr. and Mrs. Chehab found a ship that broughtthem to Brooklyn. In Brooklyn, they put the baby into a cradle,in the cool corner of a basement bakery on Joralemon Street.And all the while, my mother said-a trill of profoundamusement rising into her voice-in County Clare, Mrs.Chehab - who was a McMahon then-was taking her own firsbreaths. And shivering, no doubt, in the eternal dampness ofthat bleak country's bitter air.My mother looked at me from over her shoulder, her handsstill in the sink.There's a burned taste to the air at home, she said-not forthe first time. A taste of wet ashes and doused fire. It can makeyou believe, she said, that you live in the permanent aftermath ofsome nearby sorrow. Somewhere in the vicinity, you're alwaysthinking, someone's house has recently burned to the ground.In that damp and dirty country, my mother said, Mrs. Chehabgrew to be a tall girl, a girl who would have no troublegetting up the steep gangplank that led from the dock at eenstown-a climb my mother herself had struggled with, she said,because of the rain that fell on the day she sailed, because she wasalone, with no man's arm to hold on to and none offered across thewhole trip, not until my father gave her his on the steps at theGrand Army Plaza.But Mrs. Chehab would have had no trouble keeping thoselong feet steady against the slick and pitching floor of the shipthat carried her here. Where she stopped at the Syrian bakeryone day and saw a small, dark-eyed man behind the counter.I watched my mother move her hands through the wateronce more, searching for stray silverware, smiling her sly smile
apron balled up beneath his arm, the ties trailing. 1here was thescent of new-baked bread as he passed. Big Lucy, a girl I feared,pushed a scooter along the opposite sidewalk. T wo Sisters ofCharity from the convent down the street passed by, smiling frominside their bonnets. I turned my head to watch their backs, wonderingalways why their long hems never caught at their heels.At the end of the block, the Sisters paused to greet a heavy womanwith thick, pale legs and a dark apron under her coat. She saidsomething to them that made them nod. Tuen the three turnedthe corner together. 1he game paused again, and the boys partedreluctantly as a black car drove by.I shivered and waited, little Marie. Sole survivor, now, ofthat street scene. Waited for the first sighting of my father, comingup from the subway in his hat and coat, most beloved amongall those ghosts.Once, I stepped up to the glass case in the delicatessen in RegoPark, ready to call out my order. I was pregnant with my firschild, hungry, a little light-headed. In a few months' time, Iwould be at death's door, last rites and all-my mother swingingher purse at the head of the priest who came to deliver thembut on this day there was only a sudden rupture behind my eyes.I fell without knowing I fell, like a sack of potatoes. And then Iwas faceup on the wooden floor. My legs were turned beneathme. 1here was an ache along the fleshy edge of my palm. Facesabove me. More pain dawning, in my ankle, at the back of myskull. 1here was tuna salad on my hand and on my elbow and onthe edge of my spring coat, where I had caught somebody's ordergoing down. I saw only the aproned bosom of the owner's wifeas I was lifted and led to a chair in the back room. 1here wassawdust on the floor and brown towers of damp cardboard boxesalong one wall. A strong smell of salami. 1hey sat me down in ametal folding chair that was the same color as the cardboard
at the delightful oddity of it all. Then she pulled the stopperfrom the sink, and I closed my eyes and put my fingers in my earsto block out the terrible sound.When I removed them and opened my eyes, my mother wasswabbing the counter. ''And after all that," she said, "and after allthat, along comes homely Pegeen, with her mother's blotched skinand her father's big nose and those great long feet, God help her."When the dishes were put away, my father went to the narrowcloset for his hat and said, "Let's take a stroll."We went down the stairs together. Shined black tips of hisneat shoes and perfect fall of his trouser cuffs over the smoothlaces. A lilt in the tap of his step on the uncarpeted stair, the tapof our steps. Out through the vestibule and onto the sidewalkagain. We were in front of the Chehabs' building when he droppedmy hand and paused to light a cigarette, the smoke rising whitefrom under the bowed brim of his hat. And then he threw hishead back with the pleasure of that first exhalation of smoke.Made me look up as well to see the stars. A thin handsome man,forty years old.It was one of his shanty cousins, the McGeevers, who wouldlater say that a body so thin was nothing more than a walkinginvitation to misfortune.He took my hand again. There was the sure familiarity of hisgrip, warm and firm, the palm broad against my small fingersWe walked to the other corner, away from the subway, althoughthere was still the sound of it somewhere beneath our feet. Therewas as well the sound of a trolley on another street, the sound ofsomeone calling to a child, someone shouting inside a building.Lights at windows were growing brighter, growing warmer, itseemed, as the air grew cold. There was the scent of metal, whifof tar, of stone, of dog droppings left beside the wrought-iron
will, up over the cold rim of the high tub and into the steamingwater, where the pain from the heat became a chill in my spineand my thin body-bright red to my calves but pale white, nearlyblue, through my chest and my arms-became no more than ascrap of cloth, a scrap of cloth caught and shaken and snappedby a sudden wind. I wanted to weep. I wanted to be sick. I sawfor a terrible moment that my body was a scrap of cloth, that mybones were no more than porcelain, as were my rattling teeth andthe china skull that contained them. I saw how a hoop of light,the water's shifting refiection, swung up to the top of the tilewall, and then swung down again, carrying me with it, nauseousand full of despair. I sat. Tue warm water covered my arms andtouched my chin. My mother let go of my forearm, although theimprint of her grip lingered.There, she said. There now. After all your fussing. You justhave to get used to it.In those days I still slept in the crib that had been my brother's,in a corner of the small room I shared with him. A peeling lambpainted on the headboard, a blurred line of grass and meadowfiowers at the foot. Low light. Prayers. My parents' dry lips tomy forehead and some single, barely whispered word at the endof the day that told me I was cherished above all things by theseindistinct and warm-breathed shadows, leaning over me at theend of the day.Gabe came in sometime later. Another blur of darkness andlight-dark clothes and fair hair-coming in to take the pajamasout from under his pillow. When he returned, he was abrighter blur because he was dressed in them. Through the barsof the crib, I watched him kneel to say his prayers and then pulldown his covers and climb into bed. He slept on his back, a wristover his eyes, like another picture book illustration I had seen, of
and the darkness fell away. I clutched the hard edge of the box,resisting even as I gave in, put my face to the moon-coloredbrightness of Pegeen's cheeks, kissed her, and then saw my ownwhite face briefly reflected in the dark glass of the bay window asI was returned once more to the pooled shadows of the floor.At home, my mother unpinned her hat and my father returnedhis fedora and his topcoat to the closet. Mrs. Chehab, they weresaying, had noticed the dirt on Pegeen's coat and the tears in hersleeves, circles of soot on the knees of her good stockings, wellbefore yesterday's last tumble down the basement stair. Pegeenhad always been a clumsy girl, they said, although Fagin, the undertaker,suspected something more than the fall had killed her:Some burden in the brain, he had said.My mother turned back the good tablecloth and my brotherbrought out his books. On this evening, to make up for the timelost on our visit to Pegeen, we had our tea quietly as he studiedamong us, the only sound in the room the ringing of my father'scup against the saucer, which I imitated with the clanging of myown. Tue visit to the Chehabs' had deprived us of our eveningwalk to the speakeasy as well.And then my brother closed the thick book before him andreached for another from the pile beside his chair, this one wornand leather-bound, with thin pages. He turned them, and then,with his hands tucked under his thighs, bent over the book toread. I saw my parents look to him, to the top of his bowed head.It seemed to me they were watching him slyly, as if, were he toraise his head again, their eyes would dart away.He began to read out loud. He did not read in the same clearway he recited his poems, but softly, sitting hunched over thetable, the words breaking here and there under the burden of hisnew, thickening voice. "'Are not two sparrows sold for a smallcoin?'" he read. '"Yet not one of them falls to the ground withoutyour Father's knowledge. Even all the hairs of your headand the darkness fell away. I clutched the hard edge of the box,resisting even as I gave in, put my face to the moon-coloredbrightness of Pegeen's cheeks, kissed her, and then saw my ownwhite face briefly reflected in the dark glass of the bay window asI was returned once more to the pooled shadows of the floor.At home, my mother unpinned her hat and my father returnedhis fedora and his topcoat to the closet. Mrs. Chehab, they weresaying, had noticed the dirt on Pegeen's coat and the tears in hersleeves, circles of soot on the knees of her good stockings, wellbefore yesterday's last tumble down the basement stair. Pegeenhad always been a clumsy girl, they said, although Fagin, the undertaker,suspected something more than the fall had killed her:Some burden in the brain, he had said.My mother turned back the good tablecloth and my brotherbrought out his books. On this evening, to make up for the timelost on our visit to Pegeen, we had our tea quietly as he studiedamong us, the only sound in the room the ringing of my father'scup against the saucer, which I imitated with the clanging of myown. Tue visit to the Chehabs' had deprived us of our eveningwalk to the speakeasy as well.And then my brother closed the thick book before him andreached for another from the pile beside his chair, this one wornand leather-bound, with thin pages. He turned them, and then,with his hands tucked under his thighs, bent over the book toread. I saw my parents look to him, to the top of his bowed head.It seemed to me they were watching him slyly, as if, were he toraise his head again, their eyes would dart away.He began to read out loud. He did not read in the same clearway he recited his poems, but softly, sitting hunched over thetable, the words breaking here and there under the burden of hisnew, thickening voice. "'Are not two sparrows sold for a smallcoin?'" he read. '"Yet not one of them falls to the ground withoutyour Father's knowledge. Even all the hairs of your head
boxes, before a flimsy card table scored with tape. There was theslow reconstruction of what had happened. A policeman appeared,offered a trip to the emergency room, although the consensusamong the other women crowded into the narrow doorwaywas that the slow sipping from a warm bottle of Coke would reviveme. Which it did. And then the roast beef on rye I had beenabout to order, which the owner's German wife watched me eatin the crowded back room-the meat piled thickly and as tenderas butter - until the women were satisfied enough to declare, Noharm done. Tue owner's wife gave me a container of chickensoup and a quart of rice pudding to take home. She was a broad,solid woman with thick arms and legs. She swiped vigorously atthe stain on my coat with a wad of dampened paper towel, and Iremembered Pegeen then: There's always someone nice.My father appeared at the corner. Paused for his evening paper.Topcoat and hat to mark him as a clerk, not a laborer. I onlyraised my head above my knees when I saw him-although surelysomething, some sinewy energy, some delight, tensed and trembleditself through my thin back and shoulders as I gazed downthe sloping street. Tue boys playing stickball parted once againfor a passing car: it was the ebb and flow of their game. I turnedaway from them, raised a hand to the balustrade to get ready tospring. My father was a thin, slight man in a long coat. His stepwas quick and jaunty. He, too, wore shoes with a high shine.I waited until he was halfway toward home. And then I flew,across the sidewalk and into the air as he lifted me-the newspaperheld tightly under his arm the only impediment, it seemed,to an ascent that I saw in my own imagination as equivalent,somehow, to the caps the boys had thrown into the air when BillCorrigan made his call. I would not have been surprised to hearthem cheer. My father smelled, always, of fresh newsprint and cigarettes,
of the alcohol in his faded cologne. I caught my chin on his buttons as he lowered me to the ground. A brief, painful scrape thatupset my glasses and made my eyes water. I walked the last fewpaces home balanced on his shoes. We climbed the steps togetherand into the fragrant vestibule-fragrant with the onionodor of cooked dinners and the brownstone scent of old woodandup the narrow stairs and into the apartment, where my motherwas in the kitchen and my brother at the dining-room table withhis books.The apartment we lived in was long and narrow, with windowsin the front and in the back. The back caught the morninglight and the front the slow, orange hours of the afternoon andevening. Even at this cool hour in late spring, it was a dusty, citylight. It fell on paint-polished window seats and pink carpetroses. It stamped the looming plaster walls with shadowed crossbars,long rectangles; it fit itself through the bedroom door,crossed the living room, climbed the sturdy legs of the formidabledining-room chairs, and was laid out now on the diningroomtable where the cloth-starched linen expertly decoratedwith my mother's meticulous cross-stitch-had been carefullyfolded back along the whole length so that Gabe could place hisschool blotter and his books on the smooth wood.It was the first light my poor eyes ever knew. Recalling it, Isometimes wonder if all the faith and all the fancy, all the fear,the speculation, all the wild imaginings that go into the study ofheaven and hell, don't shortchange, after all, that other, earlieruncertainty: the darkness before the slow coming to awareness ofthe first light.I followed my father to the narrow closet and held the newspaperfor him while he hung up his overcoat and placed his hat onthe shelf. He went to the couch in the living room and I went
cage that surrounded a scrawny tree. 1he soft gabardine of myfather's suit jacket against the back of my hand. At the corner,we turned and he tossed the glowing cigarette into the street."I'll be only a minute," he said. He put his two hands on myshoulders, as if to place me more securely on the sidewalk beforeanother stoop, and then turned to push through a narrow ironfence that led down a dim alley. 1he air was black, but the lightsin the buildings were warm and golden. Only a few people wentby, their coats drawn around them. One man touched his handto the brim of his hat as he passed and I dropped my chin shyly.And then rose up on my toes after he'd gone, putting my face tothe streetlight as if to a warm sun. I squinted, and the light burstand stretched itself yellow and white into the darkness. I heardthe squeal of the iron gate and my father was beside me again,the sharp smell of the drink he' d just had in the air about him.He held out his hand. In the center of his palm there was a whitecube of sugar, sparkling in the light. I plucked it up and slippedit into my mouth. I turned it with my tongue. Watching, myfather pursed his lips and shifted his jaw, as if he, too, felt thesugar on his teeth. Tuen he took my hand again.We passed the Chehabs' parlor window, where there was a lampand a chair and the back of Mr. Chehab's dark head and broadshoulders as he smoked a cigar and read the evening news.In the vestibule, my father shot back his cuffs and put his warmpalms to my face. He studied me seriously, smiling only a little-lwas a round-faced, narrow-eyed, homely, comical little thinguntil my cheeks were warm enough, he said, to pass muster withmy mother. And we climbed the stairs once more.1here was tea, with a slice of plain cake, while my mother,with one of his schoolbooks in her lap, put my brother throughhis paces: catechism questions, Latin declensions, history's dates
a laborer resting in a field. Tue light stayed on most of the night,and this gesture, his wrist thrown over his eyes, was his silentaccommodation to my fear of the dark.I woke to find the light had been put out. 1here were only thesoft-edged, geometric patches of streetlight on the ceiling, acrossone wall. I threw a leg over the side of the crib, fitting my toeinto the space between the bars, and carefully-I was not anathletic child-leaned to bring the other over. I lowered myselfto the cold floor and then crossed it on tiptoe. Gabe opened hisblankets for me in the same way he did everything: quietly, methodically,with a good-natured but stoic acquiescence to duty. Adutiful child. Wakeful himself at that hour.I told him I'd had a bad dream, making it up as I wentalong: a terrible, white-fisted giant with swollen cheeks had carriedme to a high, precarious place I could not climb down fromand Gabe listened carefully, commiserating briefly, marvelingappreciatively each time I whispered, "And then," adding anotherhorror. He said, I never dream. I never have a dream that I remember.His features were a blur, although our faces were onlyinches apart. And yet the handsome, high-colored, preciselyfeatured boy who was my brother during the day, the brother Isaw with my glasses on, was far less familiar to me than this oneof uncertain ed ges and soft darkness, with a spark of wet light inhis mouth or his eye when he said that if I was good and didn'tkick, I could stay. I made my promises, and he accepted them,but he moved anyway to the far side of the narrow bed, all theway up to the wall-the wall we shared with the Chehabs'building-turning his back to me and putting his hand on thecool plaster. Tue soft sheets retained their odor of sunshineagainst the warmer, doser scent of my brother's scalp and breathand skin. With his back turned, he told me to say a prayer tokeep the nightmares away. He said ifl prayed, the Blessed Motherwould keep the nightmares away.
are counted. So do not be afraid; you are worth more than manysparrows.' "My mother's head was bowed. My father's two hands remainedfolded together over the china cup, arrested in that surreptitiousmoment of their steadying each other against thetrembling that his evening constitutional usually kept at bay.Out on the street, a truck carrying bottles rattled by. One happyvoice shouted to another.lnto the silence that followed I said, "Amadan."I said it as Pegeen had said it, ruefully, shaking my head as ifspeaking fondly of a troublesome child. I said it with my chinjust above my own china cup and its dregs of melting sugar, withmy eyes veering away from my brother's startled face and downinto that ivory light. And then, for good measure, I said it again,into the teacup itself. "Amadan."The pretty room tilted then-folded white tablecloth andblack polished wood and the light of the simple chandelier-asmy mother, with an iron grip on my upper arm, swung me out ofmy chair and into the tiled bathroom where the cup was filledbeneath the silver stream of warm water and the soap dipped intoit, once, then twice. "Again," my mother said as I tasted the bitterwater and, leaning over the porcelain, spit it out into the sink.In the dining room, my brother-the scholar-was askingmy father what it meant, amadan. My father said, "A fool. Itmeans someone's a fool."Even with the water running, the cup of soapy water at mylips, I could hear my father's shout of laughter when my brotherasked him, "Who is?"They called me "our little pagan" after that, whenever their pridein my brother's saintliness was in need of some deflating. Selfdeflating, as was their way. When the priest from St. Francis dark hair, but also the permanent scattered flush, just under the
fair skin, of her Irish mother's broad cheeks. She had a job in
lower Manhattan in this, her first year out of Manual Training,
and, she said, she didn't like the people there. She didn't like a
single one of them. She ran a bare hand along the stone balustrade
above my head. Tue other, which lightly held the strap of
her purse, wore a dove-gray glove. She'd lost its partner somewhere,
she said. And laughed with her crooked teeth. Fourth
pair this month, she said.
And left the library book she was reading on the subway
yesterday.
And look, tore her stocking on something.
She lifted her black shoe to the step where I sat and
pulled back the long coat and the skirt. I saw the laddered run,
the flesh of Pegeen's thin and dark-haired calf pressing through
between each rung. Tue nail of the finger Pegeen ran over its
length was bitten down to nothing, but the movement of her
hand along the tear was gentle and conciliatory. A kind of sympathy
for her own flesh, which I imitated, brushing my own
hand along the unbroken silk of Pegeen's stocking, and then
over the torn threads of the run.
''Amadan," Pegeen said. "That's me. That's what I am."
She pulled the leg away. Tue skirt and the blue coat fell into
place again. Across the back hem and up the left side of Pegeen's
good spring coat there was a long smudge of soot that I impulsively
reached out to brush away. "You've got some dirt," I said.
Pegeen turned, twisted her chin around, arm and elbow
raised, trying to see what she couldn't see because it was behind
her. "Where?" she said.
"Here." I batted at the dirt until Pegeen threw back her head
in elaborate frustration, pulling the coat forward, winding it
around her like a cloak. ''I'll be happy," she said, slapping at her

Pegeen Chehab walked up from the subway in the evening
light. Her good spring coat was powder blue; her shoes
were black and covered the insteps of her long feet. Her hat
was beige with something dark along the crown, a brown feather
or two. There was a certain asymmetry to her shoulders. She had
a loping, hunchbacked walk. She had, always, a bit ofblack hair
along her cheek, straggling to her shoulder, her bun coming undone.
She carried her purse in the lightest clasp of her fingers,
down along the side of her leg, which made her seem listless and
weary even as she covered the distance quickly enough, the gray
sidewalk from subway to parlor floor and basement of the house
next door.
I was on the stoop of my own house, waiting for my father.
Pegeen paused to say hello.
She was not a pretty girl particularly; there was a narrowness
to her eyes and a wideness to her jaw, crooked teeth, wild eyebrows,
and a faint mustache. She had her Syrian father's thick
hip, "to stop going to that filthy place." Meaning lower Manhattan,
where she worked.
She paused, put her nose to the air in mock confidence. ''I'll
get a boyfriend," she said. She batted her eyelashes and drew out
a sly smile. 1hey were great kidders, the Chehabs, and no boyfriends,
it seemed, had yet called for Pegeen. "I'll get myself
married," she said, and then licked all at once the four tall fingers
of the gloveless hand and swatted them against the dirty cloth.
"Amadan," she said again. Which, she explained, was her
mother's word for fool.
And then she released the skirt of her long coat and, dipping
her shoulders, shook herself back into it again. She reminded me
of a bird taking a sand bath. "I fell down," she announced. She
said it in the same fond and impatient tone she had used to describe
the lost glove, the forgotten library book. "On the subway."
It was the tone a mother might use, speaking about a favorite,
unruly child.
Pegeen blew some exasperated air through her pooched-out
lower lip. "I don't know what the blazes makes me fall," she said
impatiently. "I do it all the time." She suddenly squinted and the
flush just under her downy skin rose to a deep maroon. She lowered
her face to mine. "Don't you dare tell my mother," she said.
I was seven years old. I spoke mostly to my parents. To my
brother. To my teachers when I had to. I gave some whispered
response to Father Qyinn or to Mr. Lee at the candy store when
my mother poked me in the ribs. I could not imagine having a
conversation with Mrs. Chehab, who was red-haired and very
tall. Still, I promised. I would say nothing.
Pegeen shook herself again, standing back and lifting her
shoulders inside the pale blue coat. "But there's always someone
nice," she said, her voice suddenly gone singsong. "Someone always
helps me up." She struck another pose, coy and haughty, asbefore, her chin in the air. She touched the feather in her hat.
"Today a very handsome man gave me his hand. He asked if
I was all right. A real Prince Charming." She smiled again and
looked around. Just a few doors down, the older boys were playing
stickball in the street. 1here was a knot of younger ones on the
curb, watching. Bill Corrigan was in his chair on the sidewalk
just behind them.
Pegeen leaned forward once more. "Tomorrow," she said
breathlessly, whispering now, ''I'm going to look for him again.
If I see him, I'm going to get real close." She leaned down, her
hand on the banister above my head. ''I'm going to pretend to fall,
see? Right next to him. And he'll catch me and say, 'Is it you
again?"'
All human eyes are beautiful, but Pegeen's were very black
and heavily lashed and gorgeous now, with the sparkle of her joke,
or her plan, or, perhaps, her vision of some impossible future.
She straightened up. "We'll see what happens then," she said,
sly and confident, her thick eyebrows raised. She swung her purse
slowly, turned to move on. "1hat will be something to see," she
said.
At her own house, Pegeen didn't use the basement door, as
usual. She climbed the stone steps, taking them one at a time, like
a small child. At the top, she paused again to swat at the back of
her coat, only touching the dirt with her wrist. It was early evening.
Spring. I could see Pegeen's reflection in the oval glass of the
outer door-or at least the blue heart of the reflection, which
was both the reflection of her good spring coat and the evening
light on her flushed face. Pegeen pulled open the door and the
thin image in the glass shuddered like a flame.
I turned back to the vigil I was keeping on the stone steps.
Vigil for my father, who had not yet come up from the subway.
From the far corner, the neighborhood's men and working
women were coming home. Everyone wore hats. Everyone wore
with him, fitting myself into his side, leaning heavily against hisarm-"like a barnacle," he said-as he read the evening paper.1he slipcover, also my mother's handiwork, was a paradise ofhummingbirds and vines and deep-throated flowers, the colors,if not the images, subdued by the thick brocade. Sinking into myfather's side, slipping under his arm as he patiently lifted theopen paper to accommodate me, I entered that paradise via mytracing fingertip and squinted eyes, until he said, "Marie,"patiently, and asked me to sit up a bit.He kept a long key chain attached to his belt, and perhaps tokeep my bony weight from put ting his arm to sleep, he pulled thekeys at the end ofit out ofhis pocket and placed them in my hands.1here were two keys, small but heavy, and the metal disks withhis embossed name and number from his time in the army, aswell as a small St. Joseph medal tinged with green. I turned themover as he read, traced them with my fingers, tested the weightand the jingle of them. I wondered ifBill Corrigan, who had beengassed in the war, carried something of the same in his pocket.When my mother called to me to get up and set the table, myfather put his hand to the top of my head.Slipping out of that first darkness, into the dusty, city lightof these rooms, I met the blurred faces of the parents I'd beengiven-given through no merit of my own-faces that even tomy defective eyes, ill-formed, you might say, in the hours of thatfirst darkness, were astonished by love.We gathered for dinner, a piece of oilcloth spread across the tablenow, on an ordinary night-the last concession to my sloppychildhood, because in another few weeks, after my First Communion,we would abandon the oilcloth cover at meals and onceagain dine on starched linen, like civilized people, as my father
came to say there was clearly a vocation. When the letter fromthe seminary arrived."We're not so enamored of the priesthood as some," my mothersaid, washing the dishes after the priest had come for tea, blushingwith pride, but also holding her lips in such a way that madeit clear she was not going to go overboard-as she would haveput it-with her delight in Gabe's success. There were just asmany men in rectories, she said, who were vain or lazy or stupidas there were in the general population."One bishop," my father joked, his hand to the top of myhead, "and one little pagan. We've run the gamut in just thesetwo."put it. Mashed potatoes and slices of beef tongue and carrotsboiled with sugar. Canned peaches with a tablespoon of heavycream. Tuen the cloth was folded back again, and once again mybrother spread his blotter and his books across the cleared end ofthe long table.In the narrow kitchen, standing over the steaming sink, herhands red to the elbow, my mother was unconcerned. "PegeenChehab," she said, "has big feet." And girls that age, she said, werealways tripping over themselves, looking for boys.She handed me a wet saucer. I was not yet allowed to dry thedinner plates. 1he kitchen was warm and close, the one windowwas steamed, and the pleasant scent in the air was of soap and ofthe spring sunshine that had dried my mother's apron.For my mother, who loved romance-especially an Americanromance, which involved, for her, a miraculous commingling oflives across comically disparate portions of the globe-the marriageof Mr. and Mrs. Chehab was a continual source of wonderand delight. She told the story again: 1he place where Mr. Chehabwas bom was called Mount Lebanon, in a country calledSyria. A desert, she said. With a desperately hot sun and palmtrees and dates and pineapples and sand and-she shrugged alittle, her voice suddenly uncertain-a mount, apparently.She handed me a small drinking glass and said, "Be sure youdon't put your hand inside, just the cloth."His own parents, she said, wrapped him in swaddling clothesand carried him away from that sunny place. 1hey crossed overthe Mediterranean Sea. 1hey scaled Spain.She squinted at the damp tiles above the sink as if a mapwere drawn there.They climbed through France, reached Paris, which is calledthe City of Light, crossed the White Cliffs of Dover-there is asong-got to Liverpool, no doubt, to Dublin, found Cork, as
trim dark shoes, which was where my eyes fell when any of themsaid, "Hello, Marie," passing by.At seven, I was a shy child, and comical-looking, with a roundflat face and black slits for eyes, thick glasses, black bangs, astraight and serious mouth-a little girl cartoon.With my heart pinned to my father's sleeve in those days.Tue boys were playing stickball down the street. Always atthis time of day. Some of them friends of Gabe, my brother,although he, young scholar, remained inside at his books. Tueyounger boys were lined at the curb, watching the game, WalterHartnett among them. He had his cap turned backward and theleg with the built-up shoe extended before him. Blind Bill Corrigan,who had been gassed in the war, was on the sidewalk justbehind Walter, sitting in the painted kitchen chair that his motherset out for him every morning when the weather was fineBill Corrigan wore a business suit and polished shoes, andalthough there was a glitch in the skin around his eyes, a scarredshine in the satiny folds of his eyelids, although he was broughtto the kitchen chair every afternoon when the weather was fineby his mother, whose arm he held the way a bride holds the armof a groom, it was to him that the boys in the street appealedwhenever a dropped ball or an untimely tag sent both teams,howling and cawing, to his side of the street. They were therenow: shouting into one another's face, throwing their caps onthe ground, and begging Bill Corrigan to make the call. Heraised one of his big, pale hands, and suddenly half the boys spunaround, the other half cheered. Walter Hartnett rocked backwardin despair, raising his good foot into the air.I pushed my glasses back on my nose. Small city birds thecolor of ashes rose and fell along the rooftops. In the fading eveninglight, the stoop beneath my thighs, as warm as breath whenI first sat down, now exhaled a shallow chill. Mr. Chehab walkedby with a brown bag from the bakery in his hand. He had his white