PACIFIC

Tiny and Micah sat on the back porch of the house where they lived outside the town of Boris, watching the sun go down behind the train tracks and the trees. "Say you're carrying something," said Tiny. 
"Yeah? Like what?" Fourteen years old, Micah wore a forest-green stocking hat. His hair curved like feathers around his calm brown eyes. "Something of value," said Tiny. "This ashtray here. Say this ashtray is of value." The ashtray was made of green glass with yellowed seashells glued to the rim. Likely it came from Yellowstone or some other tourist place originally. It might have been of value. Micah picked it up and walked to the end of the porch and back. "Good," said Tiny. "Something of value you carry in front of you and never at your side." "I just didn't want the ashes to fall out." 
"Now say you get in a fight." 
"Yeah, I'm not doing that." 
"What you do is put your head down and ram them in the solar plexus. It's unexpected." "I wouldn't expect it." 
"Well, no one does," said Tiny. "Sometimes they faint. They almost always fall over." "Got it." 
"And never, never get a credit card." 
"How would I pay it back?" 
"You wouldn't. That's the idea." 
It was a cool night in May. The red sky shaded the grass and the shed and the house. "Do you still want to go?" said Tiny. "You can change your mind any time." "Dad, I've never been in an airplane." 
"We could get Paul Francis to take you up." "I mean a real airplane." 
Tiny nodded. "I just said that to be saying something." 
A band-tailed Cooper's hawk came from the west and landed on a hardwood branch with new leaves. "There's your hawk," said Tiny. "Come to say goodbye." Dan Norman walked out of his house carrying the pieces of a broken table. He and Louise still lived on the old Klar farm on the hill. The table had fallen apart in the living room. It was not bearing unusual weight and neither Dan nor Louise was nearby when it fell. Just the table's time, apparently. A car pulled slowly into the driveway and a woman got out and stood in the yellow circle of the yard light. She had long blond hair, wore a pleated red dress and white gloves. "You don't remember me," she said. 
"I do," said Dan. "Joan Gower." 
He shifted the table pieces over to his left arm and they shook hands. 
"Did you know we get second chances, Sheriff?" saidJoan. 
"Sometimes. I'd say I knew that." 
"He will turn again and have compassion upon us and subdue our iniquities." ''I'm not sheriff anymore, though." 
The door of the house opened and Louise came out wearing a long white button-down shirt as a dress. "Who are you talking to?" 
"Joan Gower." 
"Really." 
Louise had tangled red hair, wild and alive with the light of the house behind her. "Is this business?" 
"I'm getting my son back," saidJoan. 
"Give me those, love," said Louise. 
She took the table parts from Dan and headed for the hedge behind the house. Louise put the wood in the trash burner and went on to the barn, the dust of the old farmyard cool and powdery on her feet. Empty and dark as a church, the barn was no longer used for anything. Louise climbed the ladder and walked across the floor of the hayloft. The planks had been worn smooth by decades of boots and hales and the changing of seasons. She sat in the open door, dangled her bare legs over the side, lit a cigarette, and smoked in the night. Dan and Joan were down there, talking in the yard. Louise listened to the quiet sound of their voices. What they were saying she could not tel1. She saw Joan reach up and put her hand on Dan's shoulder, and then his face. The gesture made Louise happy for some reason. Maybe that it was beautiful. A graceful sight to be seen in the country, whatever else you might think of it. Lyris and Albert slouched on a <lavenport smoking grass from a wooden pipe from El Salvador and reading the promotional copy printed on Lyris's moving boxes. Lyris was Joan's other child-Micah's half sister, Tiny's stepdaughter. At twenty-three she had just moved in with her boyfriend, Albert Robeshaw. The boxes were said to be good for four moves or twelve years' storage, and anyone who got more use out of them was directed to sign on to the company's website and explain. "As if anyone would do that," said Albert. 
"To whom it may concern," said Lyris. 
"We move constantly." 
"We love your boxes." 
"So what are we doing?" said Albert. 
"About what?" 
"Are we going to see Micah?" 
Lyris drew on the pipe. "The little scamper," she said. 
Joan had given Lyris up for adoption at birth. She appeared at Joan and Tiny's door when she was sixteen and Micah seven. When Joan went away Lyris raised Micah as much as anyone did. Louise came down from the hayloft and walked back to the house. Dan made her a drink and opened a beer, and they faced each other across the kitchen table. "What have we learned?" 
Dan raised his eyebrows. "Sounds like Micah Darling's going to live with her in California." "What's it got to do with us?" 
"I think she just wanted to tel1 someone." 
"I saw her touch you," said Louise. 
"Did you?" 
Louise picked up the bottle cap from the beer and flicked it at Dan.  "Yeah, man. Pretty sweet scene." 
Dan caught the cap and tossed it toward the corner, where it landed on the floor by the wastebasket. "Where were you?" said Dan. "Up in the barn." 
"How was it?" 
"The same. Good." When Lyris and Albert arrived, Tiny was drinking vodka and Hi-C and watching the Ironman Triathlon on television. An athlete had completed the running part and was staggering around like a newborn colt. People tried to corral him, with little success. "What you need in that situation is a wheelbarrow," said Tiny. 
Lyris and Albert stood on either side of his chair, looking at the screen. 
"Is there archery in this?" Albert asked. 
Tiny laughed. "Hell no, there isn't archery. You swim, ride a bike, and run. It all has to be done in seventeen minutes." "That can't be right," said Lyris. 
''I'm sorry. Hours," said Tiny. 
"Where's Micah?" 
Tiny tipped his head back to gaze at the ceiling. "In his room. Packing his belongings." "How are you?" 
"I'm all right." 
Albert sat down in a chair to watch TV, or watch Tiny watching TV. Lyris climbed the narrow stairs between pineboard walls lined with pictures that she had cut from magazines and framed. Micah had Lyris's old suitcase open on his bed and was folding clothes into it. The suitcase was made of woven sand-colored fibers with red metal corners. From the pocket of her jeans Lyris took a folded sheet of paper and tucked it in the suitcase. "Okay, boy, that's my number," she said. "You get into trouble, you need to talk, I'm here." "Who will call me 'boy' in California?" 
"No one. That's why you shouldn't leave." 
"Do you think so?" 
She shrugged. "Go and see what it is." 
"Are airplanes loud?" 
"You get used to it," said Lyris. "Sometimes they kind of shake." "They shake?""Well, no. Rattle. Occasionally. From bumps in the clouds. But that'snothing. If you get nervous just look at the flight people. No matter whathappens, they always seem to be thinking, Hmm-hmm-hmm, wonder whatI'll have for supper tonight."The hotel that Joan stayed in had a tavern with blue neon lights in thewindows. She went in and sat at the bar and ordered a Dark and Stormy.The bartender was a young woman in a black and white smock withhorizontal ivy vines above the helt and black-eyed Susans below."Are you here for the wedding?" she asked.Joan explained about Micah-how she'd left him seven years ago andwanted a chance to make up for it."Oh my," said the bartender. "That will be quite a change for everyone.""It will," saidJoan. "They all probably think it will be a big disaster.""Well, it seems brave to me."Joan took a drink. "It does?""Oh, yeah. Even kind of, what would you say, inspirational.""You are the sweetest girl," saidJoan."You look like someone on TV.""I am.""Sister Mia. On Forensic Mystic."Joan nodded."Oh my gosh," said the bartender. "Would you autograph my hand?""I would be honored.""Say 'Sister Mia."'Joan held the bartender's hand palm up and using a purple felt pen wrote"Sister Mia" and drew a heart with an arrow through it."People will think I did this myself," said the bartender."Why would you?"Joan finished her drink and went to her room. It was on the second floorin the back, overlooking a pond with dark trees and houses all around. Sheturned off the lights in the room and stood on the balcony looking at thewater.Tiny made breakfast and Micah came downstairs to the smell of scrambledeggs and Canadian bacon and coffee. They ate and Micah asked Tiny if hewas going to fight withJoan and Tiny shook his head."I don't think about her that much anymore.""You watch her show." "Sometimes.""You must think of her then."Tiny put pepper on his food from a red tin. "I have trouble enoughfollowing the story.""I believe that.""You have to mind her," said Tiny. "Maybe you think she owes you. Thatwon't work. You have to mind her like you mind me.""I don't mind you.""Well, use your imagination.""You seem more like a brother than a father to me," said Micah. "And Idon't mean that bad."Tiny got up and carried his plate and silverware to the sink, where hewashed and rinsed them and put them on the drainboard."I don't take it bad," he said.Joan arrived in the middle of the morning, and Micah watched her from thewindow. She crossed the yard smiling, as if thinking it was not so differentfrom what she remembered.The three of them met on the front porch. For a moment they seemed tobe waiting for someone to appear who could tel1 them what to do.Then Joan took Micah in her arms and pressed her head to his chest. Hewas a head taller than she."I can hear your heart," she said."Come on inside," said Tiny."You have to invite me.""I just did.""Come in, Mom," said Micah.Joan took a chair at the table. Her eyelids and lips were brushed with finereddish powder, and her skin glowed like a lamp in the room."We had eggs and Canadian bacon," said Tiny. "Do you want some?""No thank you, I ate at the hotel," she said quietly."How was it?""Fair.""Where you staying?""The American Suites," saidJoan."Nice.""Oh! There's the broom.""What?" said Tiny."I see the broom. I bought it, and now I'm looking right at it." "Yeah, we haven't changed. It's missing a few straws."Micah went upstairs to have a last look at his room. He thought he shouldfeel sad, but he only wondered when he would see it again. Would he bedifferent then? Who would he be?"And how is the plumbing business going?" saidJoan.Tiny explained how he lost the plumbing business. The pipes had burst ina house, and the house froze and fell in on itself. The insurance companycame in and sued all the contractors."W as it your fault?""Any pipe you let freeze with water in it, that pipe'll split. Who puts it inis immaterial. Could be Jesus, pipe's going to break. Since then I've beenmoving things for people.""Do you need money?"With his hands on the table, Tiny pushed his chair back and looked at her."I have nothing against you. You want to do things for Micah, and I hopeyou can. But do I want money? Come on,Joan.""I'm sorry.""This is my house.""I know it."She apologized again, and he waved a hand as if to say it was done."You want to stay over? You can have Lyris's old room.""We fly out of Stone City this afternoon," said Joan. "Is she going to behere?""Her and Albert Robeshaw came over last night. She's still kind of mad atyou.""You can't blame her," saidJoan."Oh, probably not."Tiny's mother arrived, her silhouette looming in the doorway. She yelledhello though Tiny and Joan were sitting right there for anyone to see.She wore a large Hawaiian shirt, jeans with hammer loops, and Red Wingboots. People feared her, as if she had special powers, but she was just anold lady given to yelling at people and playing with their minds.Joan stood and gave her a hug, which made her uncomfortable. It wasn'tthat she didn't like Joan, she just wasn't used to being hugged.Micah walked down the stairs sideways, dragging Lyris's suitcase by itsred plastic handle. The suitcase bumped down the stairs. The kitchenbecame crowded, and Tiny took the suitcase and led everyone out to thefront yard. They gathered around Micah in the shadow of the willow tree. ''I'm going to miss you," said Micah's grandmother. "But you'll be allright. There'll be somebody there to help you when you run into trouble.""I will," saidJoan."Besides you. There's someone else."Tiny stood behind his mother, gazing absently into the panoramic view ofher Hawaiian shirt. Her predictions never surprised him. She made lots ofthem. He hoped this one would come true.The shirt was dark blue and green and depicted nightfall in an islandvillage of palm trees and grass huts with yellow lights burning in thewindows. A pretty place.Then Micah put thumb and finger to the corners of his mouth andwhistled. Pretty soon an old doe goat crept around the side of the house.Micah and Lyris had raised her together.The goat came soft-footed down the grass. The reds and whites of her coathad faded to shades of silver. She surveyed the visitors and then stared atMicah, as if to say, Oh, wait a minute. You're leaving? That's what this is allabout?Micah fell to his knees and roughed up the goat's long and matted coat.You could see him trying not to cry, but he did anyway. The goat staredwith slotted eyes at the road that went by the house."This is barder than I thought it would be," said Micah.Tiny and his mother stood in the yard, watching Joan's car go around thebend. A bank of blue and gray clouds moved in, hi ding the sun. Colette tookout a pipe and a pouch of tobacco and proceeded to smoke."And then there was one," she said."Looking that way," said Tiny softly."You think he's doing the right thing?""He might be."She walked off to her truck, and Tiny went into the house, closed thedoor, and walked up the stairs with his shoulders bumping the walls.Micah's bed was made with a blanket of red and black plaid and a light bluepillow centered beneath the headboard. A hockey stick leaned in the corner,blade wrapped in frayed electrical tape, near an old poster from a movieabout heroic dogs.The bedsprings wheezed like an accordion as Tiny sat down at the foot ofthe bed. A car went by, the road became quiet, and light rain began to fallagainst the window.He sat with his forearms on his knees and his hands folded, remembering when the goat was young, how she and Micah would dance around the yard. CHAPTER Twoto run for a sixth term as sheriff, Dan Norman worked for aINCE DECLININGprivate detective agency on the sixth floor of the Orange Building in StoneCity.The agency was called Lord Norman Associates, after its founder, LynnLord, but Dan and his assistant, Donna, did most of the work.Lynn Lord had more or less retired to the basement of his house, where hedesigned and built clandestine audio and video devices, some of which hadbeen patented. Lynn was said to be one of the hest darts players in thecounty, not that the county was teeming with darts playersOne day a middle-aged couple came in to see Dan. Their case would turnout to be important, though not in a way that anyone could have predicted."Do you have children?" said the man."No," said Dan."Well, then you don't know."They explained in halting fashion, correcting and annotating each other'sremarks. Couples rarely speak smoothly to a private investigator. Anyway,their daughter, Wendy, had fallen in with a man from out of town. JackSnow was his name, and he ran a mail-order trade in Celtic artifacts from awarehouse by the railyards. He'd moved in with Wendy, and she kept thebooks for his business. Before that, she had made beaded moccasins of herown design."Now, when you say artifacts," said Dan."We haven't seen them," said the woman. "Haven't been allowed to. Butwe think they're worthless.""Why?""Certain things she said.""'They're not what they seem,"' said the father."Meaning what?""She wouldn't elaborate," said the mother. "She said we were down onher boyfriend, and our concerns were trite.""Aren't all antiques overpriced?" said Dan."What if they're not antiques," said the mother. "He's raking in the money," said the father. "They're riding around townin a Shelby Mustang. One weekend they up and flew to Reno to playblackjack. It doesn't feel right.""We don't want Wendy mixed up in anything.""Maybe we're crazy," said the father."We hope we are."As they spoke, Dan took notes on a legal pad:daughterWendyboyfriendJack Snowartifactswarehousenot what they seemShelbyRenocrazyLouise drove a bleached-blue IH Scout II with a three-speed manual on thecolumn. It was a rough ride but that was okay because she liked feeling theroad. The door seals were dry and cracked. The smells of springtime driftedin: new grass, pollen, hird wings.She had inherited the three-story Kleeborg Building in Stone City and rana thrift store on the ground floor and rented out the rest as apartments.Louise and the man who left her the building, Perry Kleeborg, had been inthe photography business together, and after he <lied, in his nineties, shedidn't want to keep it going without him.Over time the thrift store filled up with the things left by the emptying ofthe old farmhouses. Small chairs of coarse fabric, barometers and birdcages,hunting jackets lined with flannel, books bound in dark green and red,pottery from the old studios.Louise would buy things from the forties, fifties, and sixties, but nothingfrom the seventies and after, for that was when the quality fell off. Thehours she kept were noon to nine.That morning, before opening, she sat out front with coffee and a smoke.She wore a man's pinstriped jacket and watched the traffic along the street.The sun was out, and she felt good and warm with the wind blowing herhair.A crow spiraled down between the blocks as a white and blue transit bus came from the east. The crown of the bus clipped the crow and left itflapping on the pavement.Louise ran into the street, took off her jacket, and used it to gather up thecrow. She carried it into the store and put it in a cardboard box. The hirdhad black eyes ringed with gold and bobbed its head in disbelief, to be onemoment flying and the next in a box.The lining of the jacket was streaked with crow liquid of some kind, andLouise took the jacket out behind the shop and put it in the dumpster.When she returned, she had a customer-tall and thin and pale, perhaps inher twenties, dressed in black, with shining white hair and inch-long bangs."My name is Sandra Zulma," she said. "I'm looking for a rock." Shepressed her fists together to indicate the size."We have a geode," said Louise. "You can see the crystals inside. On thetab le with the coin banks of the presidents.""No. It's a ... particular rock.""Is it special?"The woman looked at Louise with clear blue eyes. "Some say it's a piece ofthe Lia Fail. Or it might be the stone thrown by Cuchulainn to keep Conall'schariot from foliowing him to Loch Echtra. Or a cairn stone left by theraiders of the Inn at Leinster.""Gee," said Louise. "I doubt we'd get anything like that here."Then they heard the sound of scratching."What's that?" said the customer."It's a crow that got hit by a bus.""Can I see ?"Louise opened the box, and Sandra Zulma knelt and reached inside,setting the crow upright. When she withdrew her hands it lay down again."The raven, the blood, and the snow," she said."Mmm," said Louise. "I hope you find your rock.""I'm at the Continental Hotel if it turns up."After she left, Louise locked the store and took the crow across town totwin veterinarians she knew. They examined the hird on a high table ofstainless steel, spreading one wing and then the other. They seemed happyto have a hird to work on instead of dogs, cats, and livestock all the time.Business turned profitable later in the day. Louise sold an ominouscabinet that had been in the shop forever, a set of cocktail glasses decoratedwith pinup girls, a bait-casting reel, and a sun-faded series of Zane Greynovels, including an autographed copy of Wanderer of the Wasteland. Louise could tel1 that the hook buyer hoped she wouldn't know the valueof the set, but she held fast and got a good price.Lyris and Albert lived in an apartment on the top floor of the KleeborgBuilding, and one evening Lyris stopped into the shop after work. She was aclerk for the gravestone salesman Don Gary, who had an office by thecemetery on the east side of Stone City.Lyris was an uncertain shopper who crept through the aisles, as if everyhat rack, wringer washer, and abandoned golf club required intenseconsideration.And so Louise showed her one of the better things in the shop, a large oilpainting of men and horses stopping at a mountain pass in Tibet. The mensmoked a long-stemmed pipe, and the horses stood nearby wearing sashesof yellow and green.Lyris said it was the most beautiful painting she had ever seen and askedthe price."It's free," said Louise. "A present for your new apartment."Then Louise and Lyris settled into a paisley sofa with funhouse springsand they drank glasses of wine and rested their feet on crates that had longago held California tangerines."Dan and I think the world of Albert," said Louise."How long have you known him?""Well, how longhavewe? Since he was in high school anyway.""What was he like?""Like he is now, maybe a little funnier. He played guitar in a band.""His job takes it out of him," said Lyris.Albert wrote for the Stone City newspaper, known for being shorthandedand for having dropped the cartoon stripBlondie,to much disapproval."Have you met his family?""Some of them. There's so many."The Robeshaws were among the more prosperous farming families in thecounty. They owned five places, raising corn and beans and hogs, somecattle, and a horse or two, and Albert was the youngest of the six children."They're very competitive," said Louise. "One night I got to see them playScrabble. Not something I would care to watch again."Louise refilled their glasses, thinking that she must sound like her ownmother, who in the old days would instruct her on the ways and faults ofthe community. But Louise was not Lyris's mother, though she might havebeen, given the difference in their ages. A pair of white leather gloves were on an end table by the sofa, and Lyrisput them on and spread her fingers wide."You work for the tombstone guy," said Louise."Yeah.""How is that?""He's hyperactive. Puts on Aqua Velva at work.""He does not."Lyris raised her chin, patting cheeks and neck with her gloved hands."Like this. It makes a cloud in the air. I guess it takes people's minds oftheir grief maybe. And sometimes, when he's walking around a corner, hemoves his hands like he's turning a steering wheel."Louise laughed with surprise in her heart and put her arm around Lyris'sshoulders.Then, thinking she'd been too familiar, she drew her arm back until itrested awkwardly in the deep space between the cushion and the back ofthe sofa. What the fuck is wrong with this couch? she wondered."I'm glad Albert found you," she said. "He needed someone. You'll be goodfor each other."Lyris took the gloves off and laid them on the table, pressing them flatwith the edge of her hand. "I don't know.""Well, you don't. That's all right.""I get afraid sometimes.""Of what?""Oh, that I will be left, or that it's the end of the world.""Yeah," said Louise. "Yeah.""It happens at night. I wake up and I don't know where I am. I cry out."Louise freed her arm from the sofa. "You're in a new place, with a newboyfriend.""I scream, actually. I just say 'cry out' because it sounds prettier. 'Shecried out, in her sleep."'"But Albert's there.""Yes. But I think he'll get tired of it, don't you? This terrified thing in hisbed."Lyris had green eyes that looked in slightly different directions, as ifwatching for trouble that might come from anywhere. They glassed over asshe stared at the goods in the shop."It's all right to cry if you need to," said Louise.The girl nodded, looking miserable. "Ah yeah, I think I do."And so she cried, with rapid breaths and big round tears rolling from the corners of her eyes.Louise held her, petting her hair. "Rough old world," she said. "I know it."After a while Lyris sat back and dried her face with her hands. Shelaughed a little, as one does after an unexpected cry."I think I got your shirt wet," she said."It's only a thing," said Louise.She and Lyris carried the painting of the men and horses in the mountainpass up the linoleum stairs. The apartment was a decent place. Everythingwas old but it all worked. Louise looked around at the boxes and the tallwindows and the dark wood floors, and she thought of other things thatwould go well in this place.The phone rang as Louise was turning off the lights in the shop. The twinveterinarians got on the speakerphone to give her the bad news: the crowhad died of internal injuries."Oh, really?" she said unsteadily. "He was doing so good, I thought. I wasreally counting on him getting better for some reason .... Yeah .... No .... Iunderstand. Goodbye."Louise was sadder than the death of a crow would otherwise make her.She'd begun a story about saving the bird, the story had come to a differenending, and she could not change it. CHAPTER THREECoMrNG rNTo Los Angeles, where jet airplanes crossed the mountains anddrifted down over rivers of cars and trucks, Micah could not imagine peopleand things enough to fill the buildings he saw. It was the world's largestplace.JoaJoan had a silver Audi with a straight stick and the roundness andprecision of a toy. She wore big, dark sunglasses and drove with aprecision of a toy. She wore big, dark sunglasses and drove with athoutinking, turning down a curving, single-Iane highway high in the sky.Micah saw a giant woman dressed in an emerald gown and holding aviolin on the side of a parking garage, and he saw the shining towers abovethe highways, and he thought maybe he'd made a mistake, which madeeverything more interesting.Joan lived in a village north of Los Angeles with her husband and herhusband's son. The husband's name was Rob Hammerhill, and he producedbusiness took him often to Russia.The house was a cluster of reddish boxes hidden from the road by vines,orange trees, and evergreens. No one was home. Joan led Micah to a roomon the second floor in the back. Everything was new: bed and desk, wickerlaundry hamper, big chair of blue and white stripe, bedside table with asmells of home-tobacco, motor oil, grave! dust, things like that.Joan raised the window shade, and they looked out at a slate tJoan raised the window shade, and they looked out at a slate terrace, deepgreen yard, and, beyond that, stone steps climbing a hillside rife with treesand bushes and ivy.d bushes and ivy.''This is your room," said Joan. "I hope you like it, though you might notat first. That's okay. I want you to feel free to tel1 me what you think.""Those are redwood trees," said Joan. "Thank you for letting me be yourmom again."otograph ofTiny and Lyris. They were washing the goat in a wading pool,photograph ofTiny and Lyris. They were washing the goat in a wading pool, and the goat looked into the camera, wondering if it could be eaten.Micah set the picture on the desk, lowered the shade, and lay on the bed.He looked at the black box and pressed the top of it, and it made the soundof rain. Then he pressed it again: the singing of hirds. He cycled throughwind, crickets, ocean waves, rain again, and he fell asleep.Someone said it was morning time, and Micah opened his eyes."I lied," said a boy in the room. He was older than Micah, small and thinwith a dark goatee. "It's evening time."Micah sat up and looked around for his shoes, before realizing they wereon his feet.''I'm Eamon," said the boy. "We're the sons of the people in the house, sowe have to get along, no matter if we hate each other or what.""What time is it?""Seven-thirty."Micah yawned. "I'm Micah. Nice to meet you.""Are you a Ioner?""Don't think so.""Good. Let's go for a drive."Soon they were on another freeway. The green banks of the hills camedown to the road and rose again on the other side. They listened to a bandEamon liked called the Libation Bearers.The hilltops looked close in the evening light and Micah thought youcould climb them and look around, though it would probably take longerthan it appeared."How was the flight?" said Eamon."I got patted down in Minneapolis.""You look dangerous.""I'm sure.""One time they dusted my backpack. I was seven years old. It's an honor,really."They drove for half an hour and got off the highway, headed south on atwo-lane road that wound through tunnels and canyons. Micah rolled downthe window, feeling the cool wind on his faceIt was forested country, and they arrived at last on a soft dirt Iane,beneath the interwoven branches of trees, with horse farms on either side,or perhaps it was the same farm."We're meeting some friends of mine," said Eamon. "How do you feelabout drugs?" ''I've done grass," said Micah."We say 'weed.' Interesting.""Well, we say 'weed' too. I don't know why I said 'grass."'"Six of one.""It didn't do anything. I thought I was smoking it wrong.""It's not all good."Eamon led Micah down a grass path between white wooden fences. A fewhorses stood stoic in the pastures and others could be heard knocking aboutin stalls. A husky with white eyes barked in a friendly way and lay downpanting.The three friends of Eamon sat peacefully on the front steps of a littlehouse. With crescent eyes and thick black braids, Charlotte looked like oneof the girls in the Boston Persuasion shoe commercials. Thea's small facshone in the twilight. Curtis's hair lay dense across his forehead, the colorofwheat."This is my stepbrother Micah," said Eamon. "Son ofJoan Gower.''"And Tiny Darling," said Micah."Your father's name is Tiny Darling?" said Thea. "That's fantastic."Well, his name is Charles, really," said Micah modestly. "Only my momcalled him that.""Micah's from the Middle West," said Eamon.Charlotte was wearing multicolored necklaces of glass beads, and she tookone off and put it on Micah."Welcome to Southern California," she said.They walked beside the house and made themselves comfortable in lawnchairs. Curtis had a backpack, from which he took a translucent red bong, agallon of distilled water, and a glassine bag of dried leaves."This strain is called King Scout," he said. "It's a short high and kind ofintense. It grows on the sides of mountains in a cool climate. Very hard toget.""We're not the drug culture," said Charlotte. "Cocaine we would never do.Meth we would never do.''"Vision drugs, as opposed to metabolism drugs," said Thea, and the othersagreed."You don't have to, Micah," said Eamon."They say you can do old drugs with new people, and new drugs with oldpeople, but not new drugs with new people," said Thea.Curtis prepared the bong. "It's not one size fits all," he said. "Youshouldn't enter into it with fear. That I agree with." ''I'm not afraid," said Micah.''1'11 be his copilot," said Charlotte.Joan and Rob had a late supper at a restaurant on West Sunset. She had theCaesar salad, and he had macaroni and cheese baked in a ceramic dish, andthey split a bottle of wine.The soft orange lighting and sexy pictures on the wall made Joan think ofsex. She imagined the people in the pictures coming to life after closingtime, drifting down to get it on."What are you thinking about?" said Rob."I'm going to audition for a movie," saidJoan. "It's calledThe Powder Hornabout Davy Crockett.""What's the part?""Ann Flowers.""Who's she?""When Davy Crockett was fifteen, he made this canoe trip across a river ina winter storm, because no ferryman would take him. His boat wasswamped, and he was freezing, and when he did get across he had to walkthree miles before he found a house. Ann Flowers is the daughter of thathouse. The canoe story is true, but Ann is made up. So they gave him someliquor to warm him up, and he and Ann Flowers ended up sharing a bed.""With all that follows.""No. That's what's different. They just lie on their sides looking at eachother, far into the night.""How old is she?""His age. Somebody else will play her then.""Where do you come in?""Thirty some years go by, right? Davy Crockett gets into politics, wins,loses, goes to the Alamo, all the things he does. And after the Alamo heshows up at Ann Flowers's cabin, and they spend the night together again.It's bittersweet, because their lives have gone by, and in the morning he'sgone.""The older role can be the better one," said Rob. "But I thought DavyCrockett died at the Alamo.""He did. It's his spirit that visits Ann, but she doesn't know that till he'sgone. A friend says, Hey, did you hear what happened at the Alamo? So nowshe doesn't know what to think, having slept with a ghost or whatever hewas. And when she goes back to her little cabin, what do you think shefinds?" "A powder horn.""Yes. And 'clutches to breast' and up music and roll credits.""And this is getting made?""They've got financing," said Joan. "They just need a bridge loan. Or amezzanine loan. Some kind of loan that sounds like architecture. I wasthinking I would get into movies so I would have more time for Micah.""Where is he?""Eamon took him to see Charlotte Mann's horse."Rob waved for the check. "What is a powder horn?""I'm not entirely sure."A transparent blue screen had unscrolled before Micah's eyes. The screenwas cracked like a mosaic, with beads of light pulsing along infinitepathways. On the other side of all this disturbance were his new friends,small and geometrical in appearance.Then Micah looked at the sky and found that the stars were connected bythe lines in the screen, as if he had been horn and brought here to make thisdiscovery."Is it happening?" said Charlotte."There are lines between the stars," said Micah."Are you okay? Look at me."Charlotte leaned close. Her forehead was damp, and he reached out tobrush back a lock of hair that had escaped her braids."You have perfect eyebrows," he said. "I wish I had a mirror so I couldshow you."She closed her eyes, and with the tip of her finger she wiped her eyelidsdry, first one, then the other."Once I saw a man on a street corner," she said. "At La Brea and Third. Hehad his little boy on his back in a carrier. And the boy had wooden traincars, one in each hand, and he was driving them around on his father'shoulders as they walked."Eamon shuffled around in the dust, looking at his bare feet, with a shoe oneach hand.got a lemon one time and it had a phone number on it," he"I said. "So I called the number and this lady answered and I asked why herphone number was written on a lemon, and she said it shouldn't be, I shouldjust throw the lemon away and forget I ever saw it. So I said I would and in a few minutes she called back and asked where I was going to throw it away,andsaid what, and she said the lemon, andsaid probably a trash can, and she said that wasn't good, because someone might see it and think here is a perfectly good lemon going to waste and they might pick it up and call herlike I did. So I said well where do you want me to throw it and she thoughtfor a minute and said where are you now, and I told her I was on Franklin bythe Magic Castle and she said don't go anywhere, so I waited and in abouttwenty minutes this little green Lotus pulls up and the woman rolled thewindow down and she said do you have the lemon and I said yeah and gaveit to her and she gave me twenty dollars and drove away."They laughed. The dog began to bark, and a noise came down from thesky. A helicopter flew sideways over the hills, its light coming and going, apure silvery beam touching the ground, as if the helicopter were walking onstilts."What's that about?" said Micah."No one really knows," said Curtis."I used to think they were looking for criminals," said Thea. "But they doit so often that I don't think that anymore.""Maybe they're bored," said Eamon. "Just fucking around till quittingtime.""They're like the night watchman in a Russian story," said Charlotte."Checking the doors of the midnight village to make sure they're locked.""I lived in that village," said Micah.Then a man in corduroy jacket and white cowboy hat rode down from thestables in a golf cart, the husky and two yellow Labs trotting behind. Thedogs found them first and licked their faces while the man stopped the golfcart."That's Angel," whispered Charlotte to Micah. "The owner.""What's going on here?" he said. "I have the television on, and I can hearthe noise you're making all the way up the hill.""We're sorry, Angel," said Charlotte. "We'll be quiet. We're leaving now."The driver of the golf cart looked at each of them in turn, touched thebrim of his hat, turned the cart around, and drove back to the stables,escorted by the dogs."Now Angel's mad at me," said Charlotte."I want that golf cart," said Thea.From the horse farm, they went to the beach in Santa Monica, where theybought hamburgers and french fries and sat on a blanket on the sand,eating and listening to the sound of the ocean.When Micah got home he hung the beads Charlotte had given him on thephotograph ofTiny, Lyris, and the goat.