LABOR DAY

CHAPTER 1 
IT WAS JUST THE TWO OF US, my mother and me, after my father left. He said I 
should count the new baby he had with his new wife, Marjorie, as part of my 
family too, plus Richard, Marjorie’s son, who was six months younger than me 
though he was good at all the sports I messed up in. But our family was my 
mother, Adele, and me, period. I would have counted the hamster, Joe, before 
including that baby, Chloe. 
Saturday nights when my father picked me up to take us all out to dinner at 
Friendly’s, he was always wanting me to sit next to her in the backseat. Then 
he’d pull a pack of baseball cards out of his pocket and lay them on the table in 
the booth, to split between Richard and me. I always gave mine to Richard. 
Why not? Baseball was a sore spot for me. When the phys ed teacher said, OK, 
Henry, you play with the blues, all the other guys on the blue team would groan. 
For the most part, my mother never mentioned my father, or the woman he 
was married to now, or her son, or the baby, but once by mistake, when I left a 
picture out on the table that he’d given me, of the five of us—the year before, 
when I went with them to Disney—she had studied it for at least a minute. 
Stood there in the kitchen, holding the picture in her small, pale hand, her long 
graceful neck tilted a little to one side as if the image she was looking at contained some great and troubling mystery, though really it was just the five of 
us, scrunched together in the teacup ride. 
I would think your father would be worried about the way that baby’s one 
eye doesn’t match with the other, she said. It might be nothing more than a developmental delay, not retardation, but you’d think they’d want to have that 
child tested. Does she seem slow to you, Henry? 
Maybe a little.
I knew it, my mother said. That baby doesn’t look anything like you either. 
I knew my part, all right. I understood who my real family was. Her. 
 
IT WAS UNUSUAL FOR MY MOTHER and me to go out the way we did that day. 
My mother didn’t go places, generally. But I needed pants for school. 
OK, she said. Pricemart, then. Like my growing a half inch that summer was 
something I’d done just to give her a hard time. Not that she wasn’t having 
one already. 
The car had turned over the first time she turned the key in the ignition, 
which was surprising, considering a month might have gone by since the last 
time we’d gone anywhere in it. She drove slowly, as usual, as if dense fog cov- 
ered the road, or ice, but it was summer—the last days before school started, 
the Thursday before Labor Day weekend—and the sun was shining. 
It had been a long summer. Back when school first got out, I had hoped
maybe we’d go to the ocean over the long expanse of vacation ahead—just for 
the day—but my mother said the traffic was terrible on the highway and I’d 
probably get sunburned, since I had his coloring, meaning my father. 
All that June after school let out, and all that July, and now just having 
ended August, I kept wishing something different would happen, but it never 
did. Not just my father coming to take me to Friendly’s and now and then 
bowling with Richard and Marjorie, and the baby, or the trip he took us on to 
the White Mountains to a basket-making factory, and a place Marjorie wanted 
to stop, where they made candles that smelled like cranberries or lemon or gin- 
gerbread. 
Other than that, I’d watched a lot of television that summer. My mother had 
taught me how to play solitaire, and when that got old, I tackled places in our 
house that nobody had cleaned in a long time, which was how I’d earned the 
dollar fifty that was burning a hole in my pocket, for another puzzle book.
These days even a kid as weird as I was would do his playing on a Game Boy or 
a PlayStation, but back then only certain families had Nintendo; we weren’t one 
of them. 
I thought about girls all the time at this point, but there was nothing going 
on in my life where they were concerned besides thoughts. 
I had just turned thirteen. I wanted to know about everything to do with 
women and their bodies, and what people did when they got together—people 
of the opposite sex—and what I needed to do so I could get a girlfriend some- 
time before I turned forty years old. I had many questions about sex, but it was 
clear my mother was not the person to discuss this with, though she herself 
brought it up on occasion. In the car, on the way to the store, for instance. 
Your body is changing, I guess, she said, gripping the wheel. 
No comment. 
My mother stared straight ahead, as if she was Luke Sky-walker, manning 
the controls of the X-wing jet. Headed to some other galaxy. The mall. 
 
WHEN WE GOT TO THE STORE, my mother had gone with me to the boys’ sec- 
tion and we’d picked out the pants. Also a pack of underwear. 
I guess you’ll need shoes, too, she said, in that tone of voice she always 
had when we went places now, like this whole thing was a bad movie but since 
we’d bought our tickets we had to stay till the end. 
My old ones are still OK, I said. What I was thinking was, if I got shoes on 
this trip too, it might be a long time before we came here again, where, if I held 
off on the shoes, we’d have to come back. Once school started I’d need note- 
books and pencils, and a protractor, and a calculator. Later, when I brought up 
the shoes, and she said, Why didn’t you tell me when we were at the store last 
time?, I could point out the rest of the items on my list, and she’d give in. 
We finished with the clothes part. I’d put the things I picked out in our cart
 and headed over to the section where they sold the magazines and paperbacks. 
I started flipping through an issue of Mad, though what I really wanted was to 
look at the Playboys. They sealed those up in a plastic wrapper. 
Now I could see my mother across the rows of merchandise, wheeling our 
cart through the aisles. Slowly, like a leaf in a slow-moving creek, just drifting. 
No telling what she might put in the cart, though later I would learn: one of 
those pillows you put on your bed so you can sit up at night reading. A hand- 
held battery-operated fan—but not the batteries. A ceramic animal—a hedge- 
hog or something along those lines—with grooved sides where you scattered 
seeds that you kept moist until, after a while, they sprouted and the animal 
would be covered with leaves. It’s like a pet, she said, only you don’t have to 
worry about cleaning out the cage. 
Hamster food, I had reminded her. We needed that too. 
 
I WAS ENGROSSED IN AN ISSUE OF Cosmopolitan that had caught my eye—an 
article called “What Women Wish Men Knew That They Don’t”—when the man 
leaned over and spoke to me. He was standing in front of the section right next 
to the puzzles, which was magazines about knitting and gardening. You 
wouldn’t think a person who looked the way he did would want to read about 
these things. He wanted to talk to me. 
I wonder if you could give me a hand here, he said. 
This was where I looked at him. He was a tall person. You could see the 
muscles on his neck and the part of his arms that wasn’t covered by his shirt. 
He had one of those faces where you can tell what the skull would look like 
with the skin gone, even though the person’s still alive. He was wearing the 
kind of shirt that workers wear at Pricemart—red, with a name on the pocket. 
Vinnie—and when I looked at him closer, I saw that his leg was bleeding, to 
the point where some of the blood had soaked through his pants leg onto his
shoe, which was actually more like a slipper. 
You’re bleeding, I said. 
I fell out a window. He said it the way a person would if all that happened to 
him was he got a mosquito bite. Maybe this was why, at the time, this didn’t 
seem like such an odd remark. Or maybe it was that everything seemed so odd 
back then, this comment in particular didn’t stand out. 
We should get help, I told him. I was guessing my mother would not be the 
best one to ask, but there were many other shoppers here. It felt good, him 
choosing me, out of everyone. This wasn’t usually how things went. 
I wouldn’t want to upset anyone, he said. A lot of people get scared when 
they see blood. They think they’re going to catch some kind of virus, you know, 
he said. 
I understood what he meant, from an assembly we had back in the spring. 
This was in the days when all people knew was, don’t touch anybody else’s 
blood, it could kill you. 
You came here with that woman over there, right? he said. He was looking 
in the direction of my mother, who was standing in the garden section now, 
looking at a hose. We didn’t have one, but we didn’t have a garden to speak of 
either. 
Good-looking woman, he said. 
My mom. 
What I wanted to ask is, if you think she’d give me a ride. I’d be careful not 
to get blood on your seat. If you could take me someplace. She looks like the 
type of person who would help me, he said. 
It may or may not have been a good thing about my mother that this was 
true. 
Where do you want to go? I asked him. I was thinking, they weren’t very 
considerate to their workers at this store, if when they got injured like this, they had to ask the customers to give them a hand. 
Your house? 
He said it like a question first, but then he had looked at me like he was a 
character in The Silver Surfer, with superpowers. 
He put a hand on my shoulder, tight. 
Frankly, son, I need this to happen. 
I looked at him closer then. He did this thing with his jaw that made you 
know he was in pain, just trying not to show it—clenched down tight, like he 
was chewing on a nail. The blood on his pants wasn’t that obvious, because 
they were navy blue. And even though the store was air-conditioned, he was 
sweating a lot. Now I could see there was a thin trickle of blood coming down 
the side of his head too, and clotted in his hair. 
They had a closeout on baseball caps. Once he’d picked up one of those 
and put it on his head, you couldn’t see the blood much. He was limping 
badly, but plenty of people did that. He took a fleece vest off the rack and put it 
over his red Pricemart shirt. I gathered, from the fact that he pulled off the tag, 
that he wasn’t planning on paying for it. Maybe they had some kind of policy 
for employees. 
Just a second, he said. There’s one more thing I want to pick up here. Wait 
here. 
 
YOU NEVER KNEW HOW MY MOTHER was going to react to things. There could 
be some guy going door-to-door with religious pamphlets, and she’d yell at 
him to go away, but other times I’d come home from school and there’d be 
this person sitting on our couch having coffee with her. 
This is Mr. Jenkins, she said. He wanted to tell us about an orphanage in 
Uganda he’s raising money for, where the children only get to eat once a day 
and they don’t have money to buy pencils. For twelve dollars a month we could 
sponsor this little boy, Arak. He could be your pen pal. Like a brother. 
According to my father, I already had a brother, but we both knew Mar- 
jorie’s son didn’t count. 
Great, I said. Arak. She wrote out the check. He gave us a photograph— 
fuzzy, because it was just a photocopy. She put it on the refrigerator. 
There was a woman who wandered into our yard wearing a nightgown one 
time. This person was very old, and she didn’t know where she lived anymore. 
She kept saying she was looking for her son. 
My mother brought her in our house and made her coffee too. I know how 
confusing things get sometimes, my mother told the woman. We’ll straighten 
this out for you. 
Times like this, my mother took charge, and I liked it, how normal she 
seemed then. After the coffee, and some toast, we had buckled the old woman 
into the front seat of our car—in fact, this might have been the last time my 
mother had driven it until now—and cruised around the neighborhood with 
her for a long time. 
You just let me know if anything looks familiar, Betty, my mother told her. 
For once, her slow driving made sense, because a man had spotted us, 
spotted Betty in the front seat, and waved us over. 
We were going crazy trying to find her, he said, when my mother rolled the 
window down. I’m so grateful to you for taking care of her. 
She’s fine, my mother said. We had the nicest visit. I hope you’ll bring her 
over again. 
I like that girl, Betty had said, as the son came around the other side and 
unbuckled the seat belt. That’s the kind of girl you should have married, Eddie. 
Not that bitch. 
I had studied the man’s face then, just to check. He was certainly not hand- 
some, but he looked like the kind of person who would be nice. For a second I
wished there was a way of telling him my mother wasn’t married to anyone 
anymore. It was just the two of us. He could come over with Betty sometime. 
Eddie looked nice, I said, after we drove away. Maybe he’s divorced too. 
You never know. 
 
MY MOTHER WAS IN THE HARDWARE section when we caught up with her. Now 
that we’re here, she said, I should pick up lightbulbs. 
This was good news. When a lightbulb burned out at our house, more often 
than not it just stayed that way. Lately, our house had been getting steadily 
darker. In the kitchen now, there was only one bulb left that still worked, and 
not a bright one. Sometimes, at night, if you wanted to see something, you had 
to open the refrigerator just to shine a little light. 
I don’t know how we’ll manage to get these into the sockets, she said. I 
can’t reach those fixtures in the ceiling. 
That was when I introduced the bleeding man. Vinnie. I thought the fact 
that he was tall would be a plus. 
My mother, Adele, I said. 
I’m Frank, he said. 
Not the first time a person wasn’t who you thought they were in this world. 
Just wearing the wrong shirt, evidently. 
You have a good boy here, Adele, he told her. He was kind enough to offer 
me a ride. Maybe I could repay the favor by giving you a hand with those. 
He indicated the lightbulbs. 
And anything else you might need done around the house, he said. Not 
many jobs I can’t handle. 
She studied his face then. Even with the hat on, you could see some dried 
blood on his cheek, but she didn’t seem to notice that part, or maybe if she 
did, it didn’t seem important.
We went out through the checkout together. He explained to my mother that 
he was paying for my puzzle book, though he would have to give me an IOU, 
since at the moment his funds were limited. Evidently he wasn’t mentioning 
the baseball cap and the fleece vest to the cashier. 
In addition to my new clothes and the garden hose, and the pillow and the 
ceramic hedgehog and the lightbulbs and fan, my mother had picked up one of 
those plywood paddles, with a ball attached on a piece of elastic, that you try to 
hit as many times in a row as you can. 
I thought I’d get you a treat, Henry, she said, laying the toy on the conveyor 
belt. 
I wasn’t going to bother explaining that I hadn’t played with something like 
that since I was around six, but Frank spoke up. A boy like this needs a real 
baseball, he said. Here was the surprising part: he had one in his pocket. Price 
tag still visible. 
I suck at baseball, I told him. 
Maybe you used to, he said. He fingered the stitches on the ball and looked 
at it hard, like what he had in his hand was the whole world. 
On the way out, Frank picked up one of those flyers they gave out, featuring 
that week’s specials. When we got to the car, he spread this out on the back- 
seat. I don’t want to get blood on your upholstery, Adele, he said. If I can call 
you that. 
Other people’s mothers would have asked him a lot of questions probably. 
Or not taken him in the first place, more likely. My mother just drove. I was 
wondering if he was going to get into trouble for leaving work that way without 
telling anyone, but if so, Frank didn’t appear to be worried about it. 
Of the three of us, it seemed as if I was the only one who felt concerned, 
actually. I had a feeling I should be doing something about the situation, but 
as usual, didn’t know what. And Frank seemed so calm and clear about things,
you wanted to go along with him. Even though really, he was going along with 
us, of course. 
I have a sixth sense when it comes to people, he told my mother. I took one 
look around that store, big as it was, and knew you were the one. 
I won’t lie to you, he said. It’s a difficult situation. Many people would not 
want to have anything to do with me at this point. I’m going on my instincts 
here that you are a very understanding person. 
The world is not an easy place to get along, he said. Sometimes you just 
need to stop everything, sit down and think. Collect your thoughts. Lie low for 
a bit. 
I looked at my mother then. We were coming down Main Street now, past 
the post office and the drugstore, the bank, the library. All the old familiar 
places, though in all the times I’d passed this way before, it was never in the 
company of anyone like Frank. He was pointing out to my mother now that it 
sounded as if the rotors on her brakes might be a little thin. If he could get his 
hands on a few tools, he’d like to take a look at that for her, he said. 
In the seat next to her, I studied my mother’s face, to see if her expression 
changed, when Frank said these things. I could feel my heart beating, and a 
tightness in my chest—not fear exactly, but something close, though oddly 
pleasurable. I had it when my father took Richard and the baby and me, and 
Marjorie, to Disney World, and we got into our seats on the Space Mountain 
ride—all of us but Marjorie and the baby. Partly I wanted to get out before the 
ride started, but then they turned out the lights and this music started and 
Richard had poked me and said, If you have to barf, just do it in the other 
direction. 
Today is my lucky day, Frank said. Yours too, maybe. 
I knew right then, things were about to change. We were headed into Space 
Mountain now, into a dark place where the ground might give way, and you 
wouldn’t even be able to tell anymore where this car was taking you. We might 
come back. We might not. 
If this had occurred to my mother, she didn’t let on. She just held the wheel 
and stared straight ahead same as before, all the way home.
CHAPTER 2 
 
WHERE WE LIVED THEN—THE TOWN OF Holton Mills, New Hampshire—was 
the kind of place where people know each other’s business. They’d notice if 
you left your grass too long between one lawn mowing and the next, and if you 
painted your house some color besides white, they might not say anything to 
your face, but they’d talk about it. Where my mother was the kind of person 
who just wanted to be left alone. There had been a time when she loved being 
up on a stage, with everybody watching her perform, but at this point, my 
mother’s goal was to be invisible, or as close as she could get. 
One of the things she said she liked about our house was where it sat, at 
the end of the street, with no other houses beyond us and a big field in back, 
opening onto nothing but woods. Cars hardly ever came by, except on those 
occasions where someone missed the place they meant to go and had to turn 
around. Other than people like the man raising money for the orphanage, and 
the occasional religious types, or someone with a petition, hardly anyone ever 
came to see us, which to my mother was good news. 
It used to be different. We used to visit people’s houses sometimes and in- 
vite people to ours. But by this point, my mother was down to basically one 
friend, and even that one hardly ever came by anymore. Evelyn. 
 
MY MOTHER AND EVELYN MET UP around the time my father left, when my 
mother had this idea to start a creative movement class for children at our 
house—the sort of activity it would have been hard to picture her getting into, 
later. She actually did things like put up flyers around town and buy an ad in 
the local paper. The idea was, mothers would come over with their children, 
and my mother would put on music, and lay out things like scarves and rib- 
bons, and everyone would dance around. When it was over, they’d all have a
snack. And if she got enough customers, she wouldn’t have to worry about 
going out into the world and getting a more normal type of job, which wasn’t 
her style. 
She went to a lot of effort setting things up for this. She sewed little mats 
for everyone, and cleared out all the living room furniture, which wasn’t all that 
much to start with, and she bought a rug for the floor that was supposed to be 
someone’s wall-to-wall carpet only they hadn’t paid. 
I was pretty young at the time, but I remember the morning of the first 
class, she lit candles to put around the room, and she baked cookies—a health 
food kind, with whole wheat flour and honey instead of sugar. I didn’t want to 
be in the class, so she told me I could be the one to work the record player and 
keep an eye on the younger children, if she was busy with one of the older 
ones, and later, I’d serve the snack. We had a dry run, the morning of her first 
class, where she showed me what to do and reminded me, if anyone needed to 
go to the bathroom, to help the little kids with things like fastening their pants 
after. 
Then it was the time her customers were supposed to start showing up. 
Then it was past the time, and still nobody. 
Maybe half an hour after the class was supposed to begin, this woman ar- 
rived with a boy in a wheelchair. This was Evelyn and her son, Barry. From the 
size of him, I got the impression he was probably around my age, but he 
couldn’t talk so much as he just made noises at unusual moments, as if he 
was watching a movie nobody else could see, and all of a sudden there was a 
funny part, or one time, it was as if some character in this movie that he really 
liked a lot had died, because he put his head in his hands—which wasn’t all 
that easy, since his hands jerked around a lot, and so did his head, not neces- 
sarily in the same direction—and he just sat there in his chair, making these 
sobbing sounds.
Evelyn must have had the idea that creative movement could be a good 
thing for Barry, though if you asked me, he moved pretty creatively to begin 
with. My mother made a big effort, though. She and Evelyn got Barry on one of 
the special mats, and she put on a record she liked—the sound track of Guys 
and Dolls— and showed Barry and Evelyn these motions to make to “Luck Be a 
Lady Tonight.” Evelyn showed some promise, she said. But moving to a beat 
definitely wasn’t Barry’s type of concept. 
The class folded after that one session, but Evelyn and my mother got to be 
friends. She’d bring Barry over a lot in his oversized stroller, and my mother 
would make a pot of coffee, and Evelyn would park Barry on the back porch 
and my mother would tell me to play with him, while Evelyn talked and smoked 
cigarettes, and my mother listened. Every now and then I’d hear some phrase 
like delinquent child support or face his responsibilities or my cross to bear or dead- 
beat bum— this was Evelyn talking, never my mother—but mostly I learned to 
tune the whole thing out. 
I tried to think up things Barry could do, games that might interest him, but 
this was a challenge. One time when I was really bored, I hit on the idea of talk- 
ing to him in a made-up language—just sounds and noises, along the lines of 
the ones he made himself now and then. I parked myself in front of his stroller 
and talked to him that way, using hand gestures, as if I was telling this elab- 
orate story. 
This seemed to get Barry excited. At least, he responded by making more 
sounds than before. He was hooting and yelling, and waving his arms more 
wildly than normal, which caused my mother and Evelyn to come out on the 
porch, checking things out. 
What’s going on here? Evelyn said. From the look on her face, I knew she 
wasn’t happy. She had rushed over to where Barry’s wheelchair was parked, 
and she was smoothing his hair down.
I can’t believe you’d let your son make fun of Barry like this, Evelyn told my 
mother. She was packing up Barry’s stuff, collecting her cigarettes. I thought 
you were the one person who understood, she said. 
They were just playing, my mother said. No harm done. Henry’s a kind per- 
son, really. 
But Evelyn and Barry were already out the door. 
After that, we hardly ever saw the two of them anymore, which wasn’t such 
a loss in my opinion, except that I knew how lonely my mother was for a friend. 
After Evelyn, there was nobody. 
 
One time a kid in my class, Ryan, invited me for a sleepover. He was new in 
town and hadn’t figured out yet that I wasn’t somebody people had over to 
their houses, so I said yes. When his dad came to pick me up, I was all ready 
for a quick getaway, with my toothbrush and my underwear for the next day in a 
grocery bag. 
I think I should introduce myself to your parents first, Ryan’s dad said, 
when I started getting in the car. So they won’t worry. 
Parent, I said. It’s just my mom. And she’s OK about this already. 
I’ll just duck my head in and say hi, he said. 
I don’t know what she said, but when he came back out, he looked like he 
felt sorry for me. 
You can come over to our house anytime, son, he said to me. But that was 
the only time I ever did. 
 
SO IT WAS A BIG DEAL, bringing Frank home in the car with us this way. He was 
probably the first person we’d had over in a year. Possibly two. 
You’ll have to excuse the mess, my mother said, as we pulled into the driveway. We’ve been busy. 
I looked at her. Busy with what? 
She swung open the door. Joe the hamster was spinning in his wheel. On 
the kitchen table, a newspaper from several weeks back. Post-it notes taped to 
the furniture with Spanish words for things written in Sharpie: Mesa. Silla. 
Agua. Basura. Along with teaching herself the dulcimer, learning Spanish had 
been one of my mother’s projects planned to occupy us over the summer. She 
had started out back in June playing the tapes she got from the library. ¿Dónde 
está el baño? ¿Cuánto cuesta el hotel? 
The tapes were intended for travelers. What’s the point of this? I had asked 
her, wishing we could just turn on the radio, listen to music, instead. We 
weren’t going to any Spanish-speaking country that I knew of. Just getting to 
the supermarket every six weeks or so was an accomplishment. 
You never know what opportunities might lie ahead, she said. 
Now it turned out there was another way for new things to happen. You 
didn’t have to go someplace for the adventure. The adventure came to you. 
Inside our kitchen now, with its hopeful yellow walls and its one remaining 
working lightbulb, and last year’s magic ceramic seed-growing animal, a pig, 
whose crop of green sprouts had long since turned brown and dried up. 
Frank looked around slowly. He took in the room as if there was nothing 
unusual about coming into a kitchen in which a stack of fifty or sixty cans of 
Campbell’s tomato soup lined one wall, like a supermarket display in a ghost 
town, alongside an equally tall stack of boxes containing elbow macaroni, and 
jars of peanut butter, and bags of raisins. The footprints my mother had paint- 
ed on the floor from last summer’s project of teaching me how to fox-trot and 
do the two-step were still visible. The idea was for me to put my feet over the 
foot patterns she’d stenciled on the floor, while she counted out the beats as 
my partner. 
It’s a great thing when a man knows how to dance, she said. When a man 
can dance, the world is his oyster. 
Nice place, Frank said. Homey. Mind if I sit down at the mesa? 
What do you take in your coffee? she asked. She took hers black. Some- 
times it seemed as if this was all she lived on. The soup and noodles were 
bought with me in mind. 
Frank studied the headline on the newspaper that sat there, though it was 
several weeks old. Nobody seemed in a rush to say anything more then, so I 
thought I’d break the ice. 
How did you hurt your leg? I asked him. There was also the question of 
what happened to his head, but I thought I’d take things one at a time. 
I’m going to be straight with you here, Henry, he said. I was surprised he’d 
taken in my name. To my mother he said, Cream and sugar, thanks, Adele. 
Her back was to the two of us, counting out the scoops. He appeared to be 
speaking to me, or about to, but his eyes were on my mother, and for the first 
time I could imagine how a person who wasn’t her son might see her. 
Your mom looks like Ginger on that show on Nickeloeon, Gilligan’s Island, 
a girl, Rachel, told me one time. This was in fifth grade, when my mother had 
put in a rare appearance at my school to watch a production of Rip Van Winkle 
where I played Rip. Rachel had put forward the theory that maybe my mother 
actually was the actress who played Ginger, and we were living here in this 
town so she could escape her fans, and the stresses of Hollywood. 
At the time, I wasn’t sure if I wanted to discourage this theory. It seemed 
like a better reason than the real one for why my mother hardly ever went any- 
place. Whatever the real reason was for that. 
Even though she was a mother—not just a mother but my mother—and 
what she had on was an old skirt and a leotard she’d had for a million years, I 
could see now how a person might think she was good-looking. More than 
that. Most people’s mothers you saw at school, parked outside at three o’clock
to pick up their kids or running in to bring the homework they’d forgotten, had 
lost their shape somewhere along the line, from having babies probably. This 
had happened to my dad’s wife, Marjorie, even though, as my mother always 
pointed out, she was a younger woman. 
My mother still had her figure. I knew from one time when she’d tried them 
on for me that my mother still fit in her old dancing outfits, and though the 
only place she danced now was our kitchen, she still had dancer’s legs. Now 
Frank was looking at them. 
I’m not going to lie to you, he said, again, the words coming out slowly, as 
his eyes took her in. She was filling the pot on the Mr. Coffee with water now. 
Maybe she knew he was watching. She was taking her time. 
For a minute then, Frank seemed not to be in the room at all, but someplace far away. To look at him, you might think he was watching a movie pro- 
jected on a screen located somewhere in the vicinity of our refrigerator, that 
still displayed the faded photocopy of my African pen pal, Arak, held up by a 
couple of magnets with calendars on them of years that were over. Frank’s eyes 
were fixed on some spot in outer space was how it seemed for a moment then, 
instead of what was there in the room, which was just me, at the table, flipping 
through my comic book, and my mother, making the coffee. 
I hurt my leg, he said—my leg, and my head—from jumping out a second- 
floor window at a hospital they’d taken me to get my appendix out. 
At the prison, he said. That’s how I got out. 
Some people make all these explanations first when they give you the an- 
swer to a question that might not reflect so well on them (a question like, 
where do you work, and the answer is McDonald’s, only first they say something like I’m really an actor or I’m actually applying to medical school soon; or 
they try to make the facts seem different from how they really are, like saying 
I’m in sales when what they mean is, they’re one of those people who calls you 
to pick up their kids or running in to bring the homework they’d forgotten, had lost their shape somewhere along the line, from having babies probably. This had happened to my dad’s wife, Marjorie, even though, as my mother always pointed out, she was a younger woman.
My mother still had her figure. I knew from one time when she’d tried them on for me that my mother still fit in her old dancing outfits, and though the only place she danced now was our kitchen, she still had dancer’s legs. Now Frank was looking at them.
I’m not going to lie to you, he said, again, the words coming out slowly, as his eyes took her in. She was filling the pot on the Mr. Coffee with water now. Maybe she knew he was watching. She was taking her time.
For a minute then, Frank seemed not to be in the room at all, but someplace far away. To look at him, you might think he was watching a movie projected on a screen located somewhere in the vicinity of our refrigerator, that
still displayed the faded photocopy of my African pen pal, Arak, held up by a couple of magnets with calendars on them of years that were over. Frank’s eyes were fixed on some spot in outer space was how it seemed for a moment then, instead of what was there in the room, which was just me, at the table, flipping through my comic book, and my mother, making the coffee.
I hurt my leg, he said—my leg, and my head—from jumping out a second-floor window at a hospital they’d taken me to get my appendix out.
At the prison, he said. That’s how I got out.
Some people make all these explanations first when they give you the answer to a question that might not reflect so well on them (a question like, where do you work, and the answer is McDonald’s, only first they say something like I’m really an actor or I’m actually applying to medical school soon; or they try to make the facts seem different from how they really are, like saying I’m in sales when what they mean is, they’re one of those people who calls you 
 
up on the phone trying to get you to sign up for an introductory subscription to the newspaper).
Not Frank, when he told us the news. The state penitentiary, over in Stinchfield, he said. He lifted up his shirt then, to reveal a third wound that you wouldn’t have known about otherwise, though this one was bandaged. The place where they had removed his appendix. Recently, from the looks of it.
My mother turned around to face him. She was holding the coffeepot in one hand and a mug in the other. She poured a thin stream of coffee into it. She set the powdered milk on the table, and the sugar.
We don’t have cream, she said.
No worries, he told her.
You escaped? I asked him. So now the police are looking for you? I was scared, but also excited. I knew that finally, something was going to happen in our life. Could be bad, could be terrible. One thing was for certain: it would be
different.
I would have gotten farther, he said, except for the damn leg. I couldn’t run. Someone had spotted me and they were closing in when I ducked in that store I found you at. That’s where they lost my trail, out in the parking lot.
Frank was scooping the sugar into his coffee now. Three spoonfuls. I’d be grateful if you’d let me sit here awhile, he said. It would be hard going back out there right now. I did some damage when I landed.
This was one thing the two of them could agree on—my mother and Frank: that it was hard going out into the world.
I wouldn’t ask anything of you, he said. I’d try to help out. I never intentionally hurt anyone in my life.
You can stay here awhile, my mother said. I just can’t let anything happen to Henry.
The boy has never been in better hands, Frank told her. 
 
CHAPTER 3
MY MOTHER WAS A GOOD DANCER. More than that. The way she danced, she could have been in a movie, if they still made movies where people did that kind of dancing, which they didn’t. But we had videos of a few of them, and she knew some of the routines. Singin’ in the Rain, the part where the man twirls around a lamppost from being in love, and the girl’s wearing a raincoat. My mother did that number one time, in the middle of Boston, back when we still went places sometimes. She took me to the science museum, and just when we got out it started to pour and there was this lamppost, and she just started dancing. Later, when she did things like that, I’d feel embarrassed. Back then, I was just proud.
Dancing was how she met my father. Whatever else she had to say about him, she told me the man knew how to move a woman around the dance floor,
which meant a lot in her book. I couldn’t remember all that much about times my parents were still together, but I could remember the dancing part, and young as I was I understood they were the best.
Some men just set their hand on your shoulder or against the small of your back, she said. The good ones know, there has to be strong pressure there. Something to push back against.
How to hold your partner when ballroom dancing was only one of the things my mother had a strong opinion about. She also believed that microwave ovens gave you cancer and sterility, which was why—though we had one—she made me promise I’d hold a cookbook over my crotch if I was ever in the kitchen at my father’s house when Marjorie was heating something up.
One time she had a dream that a freak tsunami was going to hit the state of Florida shortly, which was clear evidence that I should not go on the Disney 

trip with my father and Marjorie—never mind the fact that Orlando was situated inland. She decided that our next-door neighbor, Ellen Farnsworth, had been enlisted by my father to collect information to support his custody case. How else could you explain the fact that one day after my father had called up to demand that my mother take me to Little League tryouts, Mrs. Farnsworth had stopped over to ask if I wanted a ride. Why else would she come over to ask if we had an extra egg, with the excuse that she’d run out in the middle of making chocolate chip cookies? She just wanted to check up on us, my mother said. Gather incriminating information.
I wouldn’t put it past that woman to have bugged our house, she said. They make microphones so small now, there could be one hidden in this saltshaker.
Hello, Ellen, she called out, over the salt, her voice almost musical. There had been a time when I was in awe of how she knew things like this, and how, once she found them out, she knew just what to do about them. I didn’t feel
that way anymore.
As for the Little League tryouts: Little League was just one of those organizations where they squelch children’s creativity by making them follow all these rules, my mother said.
Like how they only let people get three strikes? I asked her. Like how the team with the most runs wins?
I was being a wise guy of course. I hated baseball, but sometimes I also hated how my mother looked at everything other people did, looking for the reason it wouldn’t be our kind of thing. And why they weren’t our kind of people.
What is it with that woman, anyway? she said, right after Mrs. Farnsworth had her fourth child. Every time I turn around she’s having another baby.
These were the kinds of topics we talked about when we ate dinner. She talked about them. I listened. My mother didn’t believe the television set 

should be on when people were having dinner. There should be conversation. In the kitchen, under the light of our one remaining bulb, while we ate our frozen dinner (heated in the oven, never a microwave), she discussed the possibility that the Farnsworths’ birth control method must be faulty—diaphragm perhaps?—and told me the stories from her life, though only about the old days. This is where I learned everything: when she set the tray down, after she poured her wine.
Your father was a very handsome man, she told me. Same as you will be. She had mailed a picture of him to someone in Hollywood one time, back when they were first married, because she thought he could be a movie star.
They never wrote back, she said. She seemed surprised.
My father was the one who came from this town. She’d met him at the wedding of a girl she went to school with, down in Massachusetts, the North Shore.
I don’t even know why Cheryl invited me, she said. We weren’t that good friends. But you could count me in anytime I knew there was dancing.
My father had come to this wedding with someone else. My mother came alone, but she liked it that way. That way, she said, you don’t get stuck all night with someone, if they don’t know how to dance.
My father did. By the end of the evening, people had opened up a spot on the dance floor just for the two of them. He was leading her in moves she hadn’t done before, like a round-the-world flip that made her glad she’d worn her red underpants.
He was a very good kisser. After they met, they’d stayed in bed all that weekend, and for the first three days of the week following. I didn’t necessarily need to hear all the things my mother told me, but this never stopped her. By the second glass of wine, she wasn’t really talking to me at all anymore, she was just talking. 

If we could have just danced all the time, she said. If we never had to stop dancing, everything would have been fine.
She quit her job at the travel agency and moved in with him. He wasn’t selling insurance yet. He had this wagon he drove around, selling hot dogs at fairs, and popcorn. She got to go around with him, and at night, they didn’t even come back to his apartment sometimes, if they’d driven up north someplace, or to the ocean. They kept a sleeping bag under the seat. One was enough.
This was strictly summer work, of course, she said. Winter came, they headed south to Florida. She got a job for a while, serving margaritas at a bar in Fort Lauderdale. He sold hot dogs at the beach. Nighttime, they went dancing.
I tried to eat slowly when my mother told these stories. I knew when the meal was over, she’d remember where we were and get up from the table.
When she talked about their old days, the Florida days, and the hot-dog wagon, and the plans they had to drive out to California sometime and try out to be dancers on some TV variety show, something happened to her face, the way people get when a song comes on the radio that used to play when they were young, or they see a dog go down the street that reminds them of the one they used to have when they were a kid—a Boston terrier maybe, or a collie. For a moment, she looked like my grandmother, the day she heard Red Skelton died, and like herself, the day my father had pulled up in front of our house with the baby in his arms, that he called my sister. He’d been gone over a year by the time that happened, but that moment when she saw the baby—that was the worst.
I forgot how little babies were, she said, after he’d left. There was that melted look on her face then too. Maybe the word is crumpled. Then she recovered. You were much cuter, she said. 

Back when she used to take me places, she also told me stories while she drove, but once she started staying home all the time, dinners were when she told me her stories, and even when they were sad I never wanted them to end. I always knew, after I set my fork down, the story was over, or even if it hadn’t ended—because these weren’t stories with endings—and her face changed back.
We’d better clear away these dishes, she said. You have homework to do.
The real ending came when my parents moved back north and sold the hot-dog wagon. They didn’t have that kind of show on TV anymore, like when we were growing up, she said. With dancers. They had driven all the way across the country without ever noticing that The Sonny and Cher Show and The Glen Campbell Hour had been canceled. But that was just as well, actually, because what she wanted most was never to be some dancer on television. She wanted to have a baby.
Then you were on the way, she said. And my dream came true.
My father got the job selling insurance policies. His specialty was injury and disability. Nobody could calculate faster than my father how much money a person got for losing an arm, or an arm and a leg, or two legs, or the bonanza, all four limbs, which, if they were smart enough to have bought a policy from him before, meant they were a millionaire, set up for life.
My mother had stayed home with me after that. They lived with my father’s mother then, and after she died, they got the house, though that was not the place we lived after the divorce. My father lived in our old house with Marjorie now, and Richard, and Chloe. He took out a second mortgage on that one, to buy my mother out, which was the money my mother used to get the place we moved into. Smaller, without the tree in the yard where my swing had been set up, but enough room for how our family was now, the two of us.
These were not stories she told me over dinner. This part I had pieced

together on my own, and from Saturday nights with my father, when he and Marjorie took me out to dinner, and sometimes he said things like, If your mother hadn’t made me give her all that money for the house, or Marjorie would press her lips together and ask me if my mother had applied for a normal job yet.
My mother’s problem about leaving the house had been going on so long now I couldn’t remember when it started. But I knew what she thought: it was a bad idea, going out in the world.
It was about the babies, she said. All those crying babies everywhere, and the mothers stuffing pacifiers in their mouths. She said more too—about weather and traffic, and nuclear power plants and the danger of waves from high-voltage lines. But it was the babies that got to her most, and their mothers.
They never pay attention, she said. It’s as if the big accomplishment was
giving birth to these children, and once they had them, the whole thing was just a chore that you got through the best you could by pumping them full of soda and sitting them down in front of videos (these were just starting to get popular then). Doesn’t anyone ever talk to their children anymore? she said.
Well, she did, all right. Too much, in my opinion. She was always home now. The only person she really had any interest in seeing now, she said, was me.
NOW AND THEN WE’D STILL DRIVE PLACES, but instead of going in herself she’d send me with the money and stay in the car. Or she’d say why bother driving to the store when you can order from Sears? When we did go to the supermarket, she’d stock up on things like Campbell’s soup and Cap’n Andy fish dinners, peanut butter and frozen waffles, and pretty soon it was like we lived in a bomb shelter. Sears had already provided the deep freeze by this point, and it was

filled with frozen dinners. A hurricane could have hit, and we’d be set for weeks, we had so many provisions stored up. Powdered milk was better for me anyway, she said. Less fat. Her parents had both suffered from high cholesterol and died young. We had to keep an eye on that.
Then she started getting everything from mail-order catalogs—this being the days before the Internet—even things like our underwear and socks, and commenting on how much traffic there was in town now, that a person really shouldn’t even drive there anymore, especially when you considered how it contributed to pollution. I had this idea we should get a motor scooter: I’d seen a character riding one on a TV show, and I pictured how much fun it could be, the two of us buzzing around town, doing our errands.
How many errands does a person really need to do? she said. When you think about it, all that going around to places just wasted so much time you could be spending in your own home.
Back when I was younger, I was always trying to get her out of the house. Let’s go bowling, I said. Miniature golf. The science museum. I tried to think of things she might like—a Christmas craft show over at the high school, a production of Oklahoma! put on by the Lions Club.
There’ll be dancing, I said. Big mistake, to mention this.
They just call it dancing, she said.
SOMETIMES I WONDERED IF THE PROBLEM was how much she’d loved my father. I had heard about cases where a person loved someone so much that if they died or went away, the person never got over it. This was what people meant when they talked about a broken heart. Once, when we were having our frozen dinners, and she’d just poured herself a third glass of wine, I had considered asking my mother about this. I wondered if what it took to make a person hate another person the way she seemed to hate my father now was having

once loved him in equal measure. It seemed like something they might teach you in science class—physics, though we hadn’t studied this yet. Like a teeter-totter where how high the person goes up on one side depends on how low the person goes down on the other.
What I decided was, it hadn’t been losing my father that broke my mother’s heart, if that was what had taken place, as it appeared. It was losing love itself—the dream of making your way across America on popcorn and hot dogs, dancing your way across America, in a sparkly dress with red underpants. Having someone think you were beautiful, which, she had told me, my father used to tell her she was, every day.
Then there’s nobody saying that anymore, and you are like one of those ceramic hedgehogs with the plants growing on it that the person who bought it forgot to keep watered. You are like a hamster nobody remembered to feed.
That was my mother. I could try to make up for some of the neglect, which I
did, when I left her notes on her bed that said things like “For the World’s Number One Mom” with some rock I found or a flower, and jokes from my joke-a-day book, times when I made up funny songs for her, or cleaned out the silverware drawer and laid shelf liner paper on all the shelves, and when her birthday came around, or Christmas, and I gave her coupon books with the pages stapled together and on each one a promise like “Redeemable for carrying out trash,” or “Good for one vacuuming job.” When I was younger, I had made a coupon once that said “Husband for a day,” with the promise that whenever she cashed that one in, it would be just like having a husband around the house again, whatever she wanted, I’d take care of it.
At the time I was too young to understand the part of being Husband for a Day I was not equipped to carry out, but in another way I think I sensed my own terrible inadequacy and it was the knowledge of this that weighed on me, when I lay in my narrow bed in my small room, next to hers, the walls between

us so thin it was almost as if she were there with me. I could feel her loneliness and longing, before I had a name for it. It had probably never been about my father really. Looking at him now, it was hard to imagine he could ever have been worthy of her. What she had loved was loving.
A year or two after the divorce, on one of our Saturday nights, my father had asked me if I thought my mother was going crazy. I was probably seven or eight at the time, not that my being older would have made it any easier to address this question. I was old enough to know that most people’s mothers didn’t sit in the car while their son ran into the grocery store with the money, to do the shopping for them, or go up to the teller at the bank—no ATM machines yet—with a check for five hundred dollars. Enough cash, she said, so we wouldn’t have to make another trip for a long time.
I had been to other people’s houses, so I knew how other mothers
were—the way they went to jobs and drove their children around and sat on the benches at the ball games and went to the beauty parlor and the mall and attended back-to-school night. They had friends, not just one sad woman with a retarded son in an oversize stroller.
She’s just shy, I told my father. She’s busy with her music lessons. This was the year my mother had taken up the cello. She had watched a documentary about a famous cello player, possibly the greatest in the world, who got a disease so she started missing notes and dropping the bow and pretty soon she couldn’t play anymore, and her husband, who was also a famous musician, had left her for another woman.
My mother had told me this story while we finished our Cap’n Andy frozen fish dinners one night. The husband had started sleeping with the famous cello player’s sister, my mother told me. After a while, the cello player couldn’t walk anymore. She had to lie there in bed, in the same house where the

husband was in bed with the sister.
Making love in the next room. What do you think of that, Henry? my mother had said.
Bad, I said. Not that she was really waiting for my answer.
My mother was learning to play the cello as a tribute to Jacqueline du Pré, she told me. She didn’t have a teacher, but she rented a cello from a music store a couple of towns over. A little on the small side, because it was meant for a child, but good enough to start on. Once she got the hang of it, she could move up to something better.
My mom is fine, I told my father. She just gets sad sometimes, when people die. Like Jacqueline du Pré.
You could come live with Marjorie and me, he said. And Richard and Chloe. If that was something you wanted, we’d take her to court. They’d have her evaluated.
Mom’s great, I said. She’s having her friend Evelyn over tomorrow. I get to play with Evelyn’s son, Barry.
(Blah blah goo goo, I thought. Booby dooby zo zo. Barry talk.)
I looked at my father’s face as I told him these things. If he had wanted to pursue it, I might have said more—told him who Barry was, and how my mother and Evelyn spent their time when she came over, the plan they had to maybe get a farm in the country together, where they could homeschool their children and grow their own vegetables. Follow a macrobiotic diet to reactivate Barry’s brain cells, the ones that didn’t work so well at the moment. Run the lights off solar power. Or wind power, or this machine Barry’s mother had seen on Evening Magazine, where you stored up energy to run your refrigerator by pedaling for an hour every morning on this bicycle-type contraption. Save money on the electric bill and slim down, all at once. Not that my mother needed that, but Evelyn did.

But my father, hearing my report on my mother’s busy, happy schedule of activities, had looked relieved, the way I knew he would. I knew he didn’t really want me to come live with him and Marjorie, any more than I wanted to go there and live with him and a woman who referred to her two children (and me, when I was with them) as munchkins. Or kidlets, her other favorite term.
Even though I was his real son, and Richard wasn’t, Richard was more his type. Richard always got on base when he came up to bat at Little League. Where I sat on the bench, until the day when even my father agreed maybe this wasn’t my sport. One thing was for sure: nobody missed me on the Holton Mills Tigers after I quit.
I just asked because I get the impression she’s depressed, my father said. And I wouldn’t want you suffering through some kind of traumatic experience there. I want you to have someone around who can take care of you properly.
My mom takes care of me great, I said. We do fun things all the time.
People come over. We have hobbies.
We’re learning Spanish, I told him.
CHAPTER 4 

THEY WERE LOOKING FOR HIM all over town of course. Frank. We only got a couple channels on our TV, but even before the regular news came on at six, they interrupted the program to tell about it. The theory was that, given his injuries, and the fact that the police had roadblocks up within an hour of his escape—and in our town, there was basically only one road in and one out—he could not have gone far.
There was his face on the screen. It was funny, seeing this person on your TV who was also sitting in your living room. Like how that girl Rachel might have felt if she was over at my house, which she never would be, and a rerun of Gilligan’s Island came on just at the moment my mother came into the room with a plate of cookies for us, which was also not happening, and she still believed my mother was actually that actress.
“We have a celebrity in our midst,” Marjorie had said the night she and my dad took me out for a sundae after my performance as Rip Van Winkle. Only this time it would have been real.
Now they were interviewing the head of the Highway Patrol, who said the escaped man had been spotted over at the shopping plaza. They were calling Frank dangerous, possibly armed, though we knew he wasn’t. I’d already asked him if he had a gun. When he told me no, I was disappointed.
If you see this individual, contact the authorities immediately, the anchorwoman said. Then a phone number flashed on the screen. My mother didn’t write it down.
Evidently he’d had his appendix surgery the day before. They said something about how he’d tied up the nurse who was supposed to be watching him and jumped out a window, but we knew that part already, and we also knew he’d let the nurse go before he got out the window. They had her on-screen

now, saying how he’d always been thoughtful and considerate with her. A good patient, though it had definitely come as a shock when he tied her up that way. In my mother’s eyes, this probably made him seem more trustworthy, knowing he hadn’t changed his story for us.
The other thing they said on the news was what he was in for. Murder.
Up until then, Frank hadn’t said anything. We were all just watching together, like this was Evening Magazine or some other show that came on at that hour. But when they said the part about how he’d killed somebody, you could see this place in his jaw twitch.
They never explain the details, he said. It didn’t happen the way they’re going to say it did.
On the television, they had gone back to regular programming now. A rerun of Happy Days.
Adele, I need to ask if I can stay with you two for a period of time, Frank
said. They’ll have a search out on all the highways and trains and buses. The one thing nobody expects is me sticking around.
It wasn’t my mother who pointed out this next part. It was me. I didn’t want to mention it, because I liked him, and I didn’t want to make him mad, but it seemed important for someone to bring this up.
Isn’t it against the law to harbor a criminal? I asked him, a fact I’d picked up from watching television. Then I felt bad that I’d used that word. Even though we hardly knew Frank at this point, it seemed mean to call this person who had bought me a puzzle book, and put in new lightbulbs all over the house, a criminal. He had complimented the color my mother had chosen to paint the kitchen—this certain shade of yellow that he said reminded him of buttercups on his grandma’s farm when he was growing up. He had told us we’d never eaten chili like he was going to make for us.
You have a wise son here, Adele, Frank told her. It’s good to know he’s
