THE END OF THE POINT

ON THE STILLEST, emptiest days, you can almost but not quite imagine the place whenit was lived on by its earliest people, the trapping and fishing, tying and smashing, the waves the same, the rocky beaches too, but no army base, no bisecting road or fighter planes up from Otis Air Force Base, Code Red. No houses unheated, built for summer, or mansions with heat, Wi-Fi and central air. No blinking eye on a metal gate (no gate). Neither headstones nor written alphabet. Later: Here Lies John Cornell. Here Lies Tabitha Brown. Here, a stone fishing weir at the foot of the creek. Here, a summer wetu; inside, a woman labors upright, giving birth. Did they dunk the baby in the creek, wrap him in a new red blanket, dress him, as he grew, in a pair of woolen breeches? One year, they had to find another place to grow him into a man. A deed appointed to be recorded. New Plymouth. November the 29th 1652. 
Know all men by these Presents, that I, Wesamequin, and Wamsutta, my son, have sold unto Mr. Wm. Bradford, Capt. John Standish, Thomas Southworth, John Winslow, John Cook and their associates  all the tract or tracts of Land lying three miles eastward from a river ca/led Cushnett, to a certain Harbour called Acoaksett, to a flat Rock on the Westerward side of said Harbour with all the rivers, creeks, meadows, necks and islands that lye in or befare the same, and from the sea upward to go so high that the English may not be annoyed by the hunting of the Indians in any sort of their cattle. And in consideration hereof . We the above-mentioned are to pay to the said Wasamequin and Wamsutta as followeth: Thirty yards of cloth, eight moose skins, fifteen axes, fifteen hoes, fifteen pair of breeches, eight blankets, two kettles, one cloak, £2 in wampum, eight pair of stockings, eight pairs of shoes, one iron pot and ten shilling in another commodity.
One iron pot to fill with com mush, or with a rabbit trapped, skinned, boiled down to bone. John Cooke, signatory, will be the first to farm the rocky, wind-scoured fields of Ashaunt, the Point barely two miles long, half a mile wide, hardly an appendage, more a stub, a neck without a head. A peninsula, as in paene (almost), as in insula (island). Ashaunt, "lobster crawling backward" in Wampanoag. The shoes have brass buckles; each shoe fits either foot. The blankets are woolen, red. An acre for a shoe, two acres for a shilling. Fifteen axes, fifteen hoes. One by one, they bend, they sign. In the presence of JOHN WJNSLOW Jonathan Shaw JOHN CooK Samuel Eddy WAMSUTTA. + To crane this far back bends hard the mind, fills it with things crude and small, with other things whose necks have been wrung dead. Also with nostalgia (and its kissing cousin, anger). The place breeds it-for this old house, this old couch, this old tribe, one-speed bicycles, driftwood naturally distressed. At one time, a saltworks stood at the foot of the Point. At another, a bootlegging outfit. Table salt hardens here. Books mildew. Diaries flip open. Private Property: Please Turn Around. Sometimes arrowheads or bits of pottery and china show up in the chumed soil of the few fields still farmed. How fine they would look set in the antique printing box above the bed made up with white Wamsutta sheets, to the left of the nightstand where the clock has stopped again. On the Point you can still find bones-fox skulls, rabbit femurs, porpoise vertebrae and, on the shore in the crevice between two hard-lodged stones, a milk tooth lost by a child no longer a child. From May through October, swimmers-mostly women­swim, and men dunk, and children jump from the top railing of the dock. One year (and then the next and next) a bloom of jellyfish will come up in August from the Gulf of Mexico on a wave of wannth. To swim among them is to swim inside a living body, a dividing cell. A deed appointed to be recorded. From a certain Harbour to a flat Rock. Two kettles, one iron pot. 
Bargain, theft or gift. 
THE ARMY HAD paved the road. It was the first thing Bea noticed, coming back with the Porters that summer when most other families stayed away-how the rutted dirt, grassy bumps, heaves and jolts were gane. Instead, a ribbon, gray and smooth. Mrs. Porter complained about it; the two alder girls did too. People will speed now, army trucks. A gash on the land, said Helen dramatically. A wound. Bea didn't think so. Bea, sitting in the far back seat with Janie half on her lap and one leg asleep from the lang trip, was glad for the change. Where are the soldiers, asked the alder girls, craning and peering. Where are the U-boats, the enemy planes? If it wasn't safe, we wouldn't have come, their mother said, but her voice was vague; she was trailing her hand out the window, gulping in the sea air. And even Bea, who silently resisted coming every year-and especially this one-inhaled and felt the salt air rush, moist, into her throat.
Other things had changed too; you could see that right off, although the bigger changes, the anes that might make a life swerve or stay on course, did not show themselves until later on. There was a high wooden spotting tower as you drove onto the Point, where civilian volunteers took tums staring through binoculars at the sky. There was an army truck parked by the path down to the boat dock and, farther down -shouting distance from the Porters'-a high wooden gate across the road, with wire fencing on either side. On one side of the gate, a soldier, pink-faced, boy-faced. On the other side, another soldier. Sit nice, Bea said to Janie, for the girl was awake now, leaning out the car window. Who are they, asked Janie. She was eight; it was 1942. She knew nothing about war, though something about suffering. No one you should talk to, Beatrice said. At the house, it was almost like any other year, Stewart hauling Mr. Porter into his wheelchair, and inside, the three girls flying about, skipping, gallaping, Janie running after Helen and Dossy, who were up the stairs, down the stairs, shouting like banshees while their mother went into the kitchen with the maids. The trunks had been sent ahead, the maids and Agnes too, along with Blackie, Janie's dog, who was yapping now, pushing his nose into people's palms. Bea went upstairs to her room, which was next to Janie's on the second floor. There, the white nubbed bedspread, the maple bed frame, the watercolor by Mrs. Porter's mother, where the rosehip looked less like a flower than like a startled, open mouth. There, her trunk. She opened it, hung a few dresses in the comer cupboard, propped her photograph of her mother on the bureau, slid her shellflower supplies beneath the bed. Then she closed her window-the curtains were flapping, the roorn windblown-stopped in the bathroom to relieve herself and splash water on her face, peeked into Agnes's room (not there) and went back down. Take the rest of the day to settle in, Mrs. Porter had said, but Bea wanted to collect Janie, get some food in her, brush her hair, scrub car grime from her face. All over the house, windows were open for airing. The wicker set was on the porch, the clothesline hung with sheets. In the living room, there was, as always, Mr. Porter wheeling hirnself to his spot by the picture window. There was the ocean outside, frarned by the window so that it looked more like a painting than an actual sea. Bea caught Mr. Porter's eye as she walked by, and he smiled at her. She liked him when he wasn't angry. He cared about things more than the usual man, and unlike his wife, he did not begrudge Bea her attachment to Janie and hand the child off to her at the same time. And like Bea, he lived far from where he had begun-for her, Scotland; for him, a body strong of limb. "The girls are happy," she admitted to him, their laughter sounding out around the house as if the three of them had split and multiplied, Janie's voice ringing out the highest notes. He nodded. He was a large man, his torso powerful, his legs like sticks. "Out of time," he said. She did not know if he meant outside of time or running out of time, and she did not ask. Sometimes, even after all these years, she still felt the language here as foreign, hardly English at all, though the family itself, so full of nicknames, shortenings and codes, had become for her almost a second tongue. "Tea?" she asked. 
"Yes, Bea. Thank you." 
"The girls must be hungry. l'11 round them up." 
They were always wild on Ashaunt. She needed to set a schedule right away 
remind them of how things went in Grace Park. Tea at three, supper at six. Janie listened, most of the time. With the other two, Bea had more or less given up, and anyway they were mostly Agnes's, and hardly hers at that. Outside, in front of the house, then, a tremendous rumble, a dreadful, rolling, grinding noise, and the children's laughter stopped. Bea looked out the window at two lorries going by, soldiers in the back and on the side bo ards. For a moment, she felt a great surge-of fear or patriotism, excitement or remorse. Her brother, Callum, his right leg shorter than his left, was an air raid warden in Glasgow. Two of her cousins were in the war. Still, until this moment, it had all seemed, had all been, quite far away. "What on earth-" said Mr. Porter, but by the time Bea got his wheelchair around, the lorries-trucks-were gone. "IF IT WASN'T SAFE, we wouldn't have come," but it wasn't safe, not safe enough, or else why would most of the other families have left their houses empty, Ashaunt a quarter as full as it usually was, except for the end, which was overstuffed with men, machinery and guns? People disliked the noise, claimed Mrs. P., but the Porters came -Bea was quite sure of it-not because they were convinced that it was safe, but because to be here was as close as they could get to Charlie, who was off at Army Air Corps training school in Texas; as soon as he earned his wings, he'd be shipped off. He had grown up in New Jersey except for school and summers, but if you asked him where he was from, he'd say Ashaunt. Charlie's Beetle Gat is still at the boatyard and needs to be put in; Don 't carry off the pieces-that's Charlie's favorite puzzle, and his room was kept ready and empty, his fishing poles in a corner, his Yale pennant and a photo of his girl, Suky, on the wall. He was their firstborn and only boy, handsome, charming, fast and funny, and he loved this place as nowhere else. Bea was not fond of him, especially-he brought the devil out in the girls and did not pay her much mind except to tease-but even she was startled when she came upon his empty sand shoes in a closet; even she saw, in the faces of the youngest soldiers on the Point, Charlie's face.Every day, the moment the postman came, Mrs. Porter was at the box. Often, a letter arrived, and once a week or so, a phone call. When Mrs. P. got a letter, she took it off to read it before sharing it with her husband and daughters. One day, she passed Bea and Janie on the stairs-they coming down, she going up. Her hands were empty; the postman had just come and gone. She met Bea's eyes. "Be grateful you don't have any," she murmured. It was a terrible moment, one Bea would never quite forgive her for, though as the years passed, they became in their way clear friends. Suffer your tongue, Bea wanted to tel1 her. It was something her grandmother used to say. But she said nothing, Janie said nothing. They were alike that way. It was nearing lunchtime, but Bea took a hunk of bread, two apples and some cheese down the path to the beach and did not scold Janie for soaking her hem as she hent over the tide pools. Up above them, the sky was empty. In the distance, the Elizabeth Islands lay green and low. Skip a stone with me, said Janie. Her hrother knew how, her sisters too. Bea's hrother had also known how. She, in her memory, had never tried. Together she and Janie found flat stones, hent their wrists in, flicked and watched the stones sail over the water and sink down. "No matter," said Bea. "Yes, matter." Janie flung a stone over her shoulder in the wrong direction, where it disappeared among its kind. "You '11 learn," Bea said. 
"You've got to teach me." 
"Aye." 
If not Bea, then who? Janie's sisters ignored her, mostly. Picked her up now and then, whirled her or hossed her, then ran off to places where she was not, under Bea's watch, allowed to go. They disappeared down paths. They went up to the attic, where it was too hot to breathe, and came down dressed like tramps or vamps and laughing too hard, for show. "You can't." And now there was a hard fury in Janie's eyes. Now there was a hlue­black rage she'd never let her parents see. "You can't. You don't know how." Never enough, never enough, and why should it he, water not hlood, wages not a womb. Except that Janie loved Bea, and in no casual way, and Bea knew this-had always known it-to he true. Except that the love she felt for this child was the thickest love, aside from what she'd felt for her own mother, that Bea had ever known.  HE OTHER TWO untethered, set free: it was what Helen lived for, and why, as spring in Grace Park showed itself each year crocused and forsythiaed, the changes registered for her not as themselves but as signals of migration toward Ashaunt. She was, by temperament (how often had she heard it?), a high-strung, restJess girl, and thus subject to constant chiding-from Agnes and Bea, from her teachers. Don't leave a trail of clothes and shoes and broken-backed books; go to bed before midnight; organize your desk-you are no longer a child! Finish finish finish what you've begun! Live up to your potential (her end-of-year marks were high in some subjects but not in all, and she had not gotten Best in Class). Even her mother, who largely left her children's manners to the nurses, found her daughter's energy an irritant: stop circling (Helen walked as she talked, walked as she read. When forced to sit, she jiggled; her right leg had a little motor of its own). Or worse, her mother saying, almost desperately, Could you just stop talking, darling, and Helen's eyes would prick with angry tears. Of all the adults, only her father, locked in his wheelchair, seemed unbothered by her, and only he could stop her in her tracks. A tidbit from the newspaper, she'd offer forth to him, or a Shakespeare sonnet she had memorized, then feel hope rising: Say it, Daddy-Sharpest knife in the drawer, or even just Good girl-his eyes resting, settling (and so she'd settle too) on her face. Or not. Increasingly, as his body warred against him, as the war warred, his dark moods intensified. If no response came from him, her own seep of darkness, but she did not have to stay with it; she could leave him there, stuck in his corner. She was young, she had legs, she could run. On Ashaunt it was first to the water with Dos, no matter how cold it was. Most years they stripped naked at the dock, but this year, soldiers, so they swam in their underclothes, then darted to the house, to the tub with its familiar ring of rust, water sputtering out cold, then lukewarm, the two of them peeling off their clothes, stepping in (when had her sister gotten so pretty, with her mop of ringlets and little sorbet mounds of breasts?). With the water finally right, they were jostling for space, and soon again out, into peg-leg trousers and summer tops. "Teal Rock," Helen said, and again they were off, past Janie who called out, to their bikes in the garage, down the road to the path behind the Stricklands ', to the rock with its cliff faces, and so-finally -they climbed. There at the top, they stood first in the wind, then back on the path where huckleberry bushes bloomed white-pink among poison ivy and the air was nearly still. Only then did they stop to catch their breath. "I hope he doesn't die," Dossy said abruptly. 
Helen bent to pick a dried-up lily of the valley and inhale its faint scent. "He's in Texas, Dos. Not in a foxhole somewhere. Gosh. You're as bad as Mummy." "You don't worry?" 
"Not a bit." 
Their brother-also their father-thought worry was for sissies. This was, after all, a just and necessary war, and Charlie wanted nothing more than to reach the stage when he could pilot his own plane and get shipped out. She would not rend her gannents and keen like a woman in a Greek tragedy because her brother was at Anny Air Corps training camp. If anything, she envied him. To learn to fly a plane, perhaps even help change the course of history. To fly! Still, from the moment they'd arrived, she'd felt his absence everywhere, even more than in Grace Park. She missed his fun, that was it-missed how he'd have told them to quit making a scene about his being away. She missed how happy he made people; he was lighter than the rest of them, fleet. He was cocky, headstrong and only sporadically interested in school; still, somehow, he was the golden boy and impossible for even her to resent. When she was six and he ten, he had snuck her out on a sailboat to Penikese Island, just the two of them. He was the one who had named her Hellion. He was madly in love, now, with Suky, her hest friend, making Helen at once linchpin and third wheel. His letters were filled with jokes, patriotism and cheery complaints about the food. All of them wanted and did not want him to earn his wings. In front of them, the sea was ruffled by a light wind; a lobster boat passed in the distance. You could look and never even know there was a war. She tumed to Dossy. "Let's go meet the soldiers at the gate." 
"Really? Just like that?" 
"Sure. They must be lonely and bored, out here for months on their own. lt's our duty to cheer them up." "What will we say?" 
"Good day, good soldiers." Helen curtsied in her trousers. "Welcome to Ashaunt!" "But they're already here. We've only just arrived." 
"So? It's ours." She scowled. "Do you think there's one passably handsome or smart fellow in the bunch?" "You may not fall in love and leave me." 
"I never would. They're just ordinary boys from anywhere. Foot soldiers, not like Charlie. You're the one I should worry about." "Me? I'm fourteen!" When Dossy laughed, curls blowing, dimples creasing, she looked like a cross between Shirley Temple and Rita Hayworth. "You're too pretty," Helen told her. "And you'd wander off with anyone." 
They started down the rock and along the kelp-strewn beach, where sand fleas rose in swarms at every step. "We could bring Janie too, as an icebreaker," said Helen. "Everyone loves a little girl." "Janie? Over Bea's dead body." 
"Bea too, then. Soldiers love dead bodies." 
"Don't," said Dossy. "You scare me when you talk like that." 
Helen sprinted ahead. At the start of the path she paused to wait, but as soon as Dossy saw her stop, she stopped too, waiting until she started up again, and so Dossy matched her pace-start stop, start stop-the distance between them remaining stubbornly the same. They reached the road, where (forgetting their bikes) they continued on like this, and might have kept it up the whole way home were it not for the army truck approaching from the end of the Point. Dossy broke into a trot and Helen stopped, so that by the time the truck passed, they were standing together, arms linked, ready with a smile and a wave. 