 
BE WITH ME

 Chapter 1
Sweet tea was apparently going to be the death of me.
Not because the amount of sugar could send you into a
diabetic coma after one slurp. Or because my brother had
nearly caused a triple-
car pileup by winging his truck around
in a sharp U-
turn after receiving a text message that
contained two words only.
Sweet. Tea.
Nope. The request for sweet tea was bringing me face-
to-
face with Jase Winstead—
the physical embodiment of
every girlie girl fantasy and then some that I’d ever had.
And this was the ﬁrst time I was seeing him outside of
campus.
And in front of my brother.
Oh sweet Mary mother of all the babies in the world,
this was going to be awkward.
Why, oh why, did my brother have to text Jase and
mention that we were on his end of town and ask if he
needed anything? Cam was supposed to be taking me
around so I could get familiar with the scenery. Although
the scenery I was about to witness was sure to be better
than what I’d seen so far of this county.

If I saw another strip club, I was going to hurt someone.
Cam glanced over at me as he sped down the back
road. We’d left Route 9 years ago. His gaze dropped from
my face to the tea I clutched in my hands. He raised a
 brow. ‘You know, Teresa, there’s a thing called a cup
holder.’
I shook my head. ‘It’s okay. I’ll hold it.’
‘Okaaay.’ He drew the word out, focusing on the road.
I was acting like a spaz and I needed to play it cool. The
last thing anyone in this world needed was Cam ﬁnding
out why I had a reason to act like a dweeb on crack. ‘So,
um, I thought Jase lived up by the university?’
That sounded casual, right? Oh God, I was pretty sure
my voice cracked at some point during that not-
so-
innocent
question.
‘He does, but he spends most of the time at his family’s
farm.’ Cam slowed his truck down and hung a sharp right.
Tea almost went out the window, but I tightened my death
grip on it. Tea was going nowhere. ‘You remember Jack,
right?’
Of course I did. Jase had a ﬁve-
year-
old brother named
Jack, and the little boy meant the world to him. I obses-
sively remembered everything I’d ever learned about Jase
in a way I imagined Justin Bieber fans did about him.
Embarrassing as that sounded, it was true. Jase, unbe-
knownst to him and the entire world, had come to mean
a lot of things to me in the last three years.
A friend.
My brother’s saving grace.
And the source of my crush.
But then a year ago, right at the start of my senior year
in high school, when Jase had tagged along when Cam had
visited home, he’d become something very complicated.
Something that a part of me wanted nothing more than to

forget about. But the other part of me refused to let go of
the memory of his lips against mine or how his hands had
felt skimming over my body or the way he had groaned
my name like it had caused him exquisite pain.
Oh goodness . . .
My cheeks heated behind my sunglasses at the vivid
memory and I turned my face to the window, half tempted
to roll it down and stick my head out. I so needed to pull
it together. If Cam ever discovered that Jase had kissed me,
he would murder him and hide his body on a rural road
like this one.
And that would be a damn shame.
My brain emptied of anything to say, and I so needed a
distraction right now. The perspiration from the tea and
my own trembling hands was making it hard to hold on
to the cup. I could’ve asked Cam about Avery and that
would’ve worked, because he
loved 
 talking about Avery. I
could’ve asked about his classes or how he was back in
training for United tryouts in the spring, but all I could do
was think about the fact that I was ﬁnally going to see Jase
in a situation where he couldn’t run away from me.
Which was what he’d been doing the ﬁrst full week of
classes.
Thick trees on either side of the road started to thin out,
and through them, green pastures became visible. Cam
turned onto a narrow road. The truck bounced on the
potholes, making my stomach queasy.
My brows lowered as we passed between two brown
poles. A chain-
link fence lay on the ground, and off to the
left was a small wooden sign that read
WINSTEAD
:
PRIVATE
 
PROPERTY
. A large cornﬁeld greeted us, but the stalks were
dry and yellow, appearing as if they were days away from
withering up and dying. Beyond them, several large horses
grazed behind a wooden fence that was missing many of

ts middle panels. Cows roamed over most of the property
to the left, fat and happy looking.
As we drew closer, an old barn came into view—
a scary
old barn, like the one in the
Texas Chainsaw Massacre,
 
complete with the creepy rooster compass thing swiveling
on the roof. Several yards beyond the barn was a two- story
home. The white walls were gray, and even from the truck,
I could tell there was more paint peeling than there was
on the house. Blue tarp covered several sections of the roof,
and a chimney looked like it was half crumbling. Red dusty
 bricks were stacked along the side of the house, as if
someone had started to repair the chimney but grew bored
and gave up. There was also a cemetery of broken-
down
cars behind the barn, a sea of rusted- out trucks and sedans.
Shock rippled through me as I sat up a bit straighter.
This was Jase’s farm? For some reason, I pictured something
a little more . . . up to date?
Cam parked the truck a few feet back from the barn and
killed the engine. He glanced over at me, following my
stare to the house. Unlocking his seat belt, he sighed. ‘His
parents had a really hard time a few years back and they’re
 just now getting on their feet. Jase tries to help with the
farm and stuff, but as you can see . . .’
The farm needed more help than Jase could provide.
I blinked. ‘It’s . . . charming.’
Cam laughed. ‘That’s nice of you to say.’
My ﬁngers tightened around the cup in defense. ‘It is.’
‘Uh-
huh.’ He ﬂipped his baseball cap around, shielding
his eyes. Tufts of black hair poked out of the back rim.
I started to speak, but movement I saw out of the corner
of my eye caught my attention.
Racing out from the side of the barn, a little boy seated
in a miniature John Deere tractor hooted and hollered. His
chubby arms were bone straight as his hands gripped the

steering wheel. A mop of curly brown hair shone under
the bright August sun. Pushing the tractor from behind was
Jase, and even though I could barely hear him, I was sure
that he was making engine noises. They bounced along the
uneven gravel and ground. Jase laughed as his little brother
shouted, ‘Faster! Go faster!’
Jase appeased his brother, pushing the tractor so it zigged
and zagged to a stop in front of the truck as Jack squealed,
clenching the steering wheel. Plumes of dust ﬂew into the
air.
And then Jase straightened.
Oh wow-
wee.
My mouth dropped open. Nothing in this world could’ve
made me look away from the splendor before me.
Jase was shirtless and his skin glistened with sweat. I
wasn’t sure what ethnicity he had in his family background.
There had to be something Spanish or Mediterranean,
 because he had a natural tan skin tone that remained that
way all year-
round.
As he walked around the tractor, his muscles did fascin-
ating things—
rippling and tightening. His pecs were perfectly
formed and his shoulders were broad. He had the kind of
muscles one got from lifting bales of hay. Boy was ripped.
His stomach muscles tensed with each step. He had a very
distinctive six-
pack. Totally touchable. His jeans hung in
-
decently low—
low enough that I wondered if he had on
anything underneath the faded denim.
It was the ﬁrst time I ever saw the full extent of his
tattoo. Ever since I’d known him, I’d caught glimpses of it
peeking out from the collar on his left shoulder and from
under a shirtsleeve. I never even knew what it was until
now.
The tat was massive—
an endless knot shaded in deep
 black, starting at the base of his neck, looping and twisting

over his left shoulder and halfway down his arm. At the
 bottom, two loops opposite each other reminded me of
snakes curling up and facing each other.
It was a perfect ﬁt for him.
A ﬂush spread across my cheeks and traveled down my
throat as I dragged my gaze back up, mouth dry as the
desert.
Sinewy muscles in his arms ﬂexed as he lifted Jack out
of the driver’s seat, holding him in the air above his head.
He spun around in a circle, laughing deeply as Jack shrieked
and ﬂailed.
Ovaries go boom.
As Cam opened the driver’s door, Jase sat Jack down on
the ground and yelled at my brother, but I had no idea
what he said. He straightened again, dropping his hands
onto his hips. His eyes squinted as he stared into the truck.
Jase was absolutely gorgeous. You couldn’t say that about
a lot of people in real life. Maybe celebrities or rock stars,
 but it was rare to see someone as stunning as he was.
His hair, the color of rich russet, was a mess of waves
falling into his face. His cheekbones were broad and well
deﬁned. Lips were full and could be quite expressive. A
hint of stubble shaded the strong curve of his jaw. He didn’t
have dimples like Cam or me, but when he did smile, he
had one of the biggest, most beautiful smiles I’d ever seen
on a guy.
He wasn’t smiling right now.
Oh no, he was staring into the truck, head cocked to the
side.
Parched as I was, I took a sip of the sweet tea as I stared
through the windshield, absolutely enthralled by all the
 baby-
making potential on display before me. Not that I was
in the way of making babies, but I could totally get behind
some practice runs.

Cam made a face. ‘Dude, that’s his drink.’
‘Sorry.’ I ﬂushed, lowering the cup. Not that it mattered.
Wasn’t like Jase and I hadn’t swapped spit before.
On the other side of the windshield, Jase mouthed the
word
 shit 
 and spun around. Was he going to run away?
Oh hell to the no. I had his sweet tea!
In a hurry, I unhooked my seat belt and pushed open
the door. My foot slipped out of my ﬂip-
ﬂop, and because
Cam just had to have a redneck truck, one that was several
feet off the ground, there was a huge difference between
where I was and where the ground was.
I used to be graceful. Hell, I
was
 a dancer—
a trained,
damn good dancer and I had the kind of balance that would
make gymnasts go green with envy, but that was before
the torn ACL, before the fateful jump had put my hopes
of becoming a professional dancer on hold. Everything—
my
dreams, my goals, and my future—
had been paused, as if
God hit a red button on the remote control of life.
And I was about to eat dirt in less than a second.
I reached out to catch the door but came up short. The
foot that was going to touch the ground ﬁrst was connected
to my bum leg, and it wouldn’t hold my weight. I was
going to crash and burn in front of Jase and end up with
tea all over my head.
As I started to fall, I hoped I landed on my face, because
at least then I wouldn’t have to see the look on his face.
Out of nowhere, two arms shot out and hands landed
on my shoulders. One second I was horizontal, halfway out
of the truck, and the next I was vertical. My feet dangled
in the air for a second and then I was standing, clutching
the cup of tea to my chest.
‘Good God, you’re going to break your neck.’ A deep
voice rumbled through me, causing the tiny hairs on my
 body to rise. ‘Are you okay?’

I was more than okay. My head tilted to the side. I was
up close and personal with the most perfect chest I’d ever
seen. I watched a bead of sweat trickle down the center of
his chest and then over the cut abs, disappearing among
the ﬁne hairs trailing up from the center of his stomach.
Those hairs formed a line that continued under the band
of his jeans.
Cam hurried around the front of the truck. ‘Did you hurt
your leg, Teresa?’
I hadn’t been this close to Jase for a year and he smelled
wonderful—
like man and a faint trace of cologne. I lifted
my gaze, realizing that my sunglasses had fallen off.
Thick lashes framed eyes that were a startling shade of
gray. The ﬁrst time I’d seen them, I had asked if they were
real. Jase had laughed and offered to let me poke around
in his eyes to ﬁnd out.
He wasn’t laughing right now.
Our gazes locked, and the intensity in his stare robbed
me of breath. My skin felt scorched, like I’d been standing
out in the sun all day.
I swallowed, willing my brain to start working. ‘I have
your sweet tea.’
Jase’s brows crept up his forehead.
‘Did you hit your head?’ Cam asked, coming to stand
 beside us.
Heat ﬂooded my cheeks. ‘No. Maybe. I don’t know.’
Holding out the tea, I forced a smile, hoping it didn’t come
across creepy. ‘Here.’
Jase let go of my arms and took the tea, and I wished I
hadn’t been so eager to shove the tea in his face, because
maybe then he’d still be holding me. ‘Thanks. You sure
you’re okay?’
‘Yes,’ I muttered, glancing down. My sunglasses were by
the tire. Sighing, I picked them up and cleaned them off

 before slipping them back on. ‘Thanks for . . . um, catching
me.’
He stared at me a moment and then turned as Jack ran
up to him, holding out a shirt. ‘I got it!’ the little boy said,
waving the shirt like a ﬂag.
‘Thanks.’ Jase took the shirt and handed over the tea.
He rufﬂed the boy’s head and then, much to my disap-
pointment, pulled the shirt on over his head, covering up
that body of his. He looked at Cam. ‘I didn’t know Teresa
was with you.’
A chill skated over my skin in spite of the heat.
‘I was out showing her the town so she knows her way
around,’ Cam explained, grinning at the little tyke, who
was slowly creeping toward me. ‘She’s never been down
here before.’
Jase nodded and then took back the tea. There was a
good chance that Jack had drunk half of it in that short
amount of time. Jase started to walk toward the barn. I
was dismissed. Just like that. The back of my throat burned,
 but I ignored it, wishing I had kept the tea.
‘You and Avery coming to the party tonight, right?’ Jase
asked, taking a sip of the tea.
‘It’s the luau. We’re not missing that.’ Cam grinned,
revealing the dimple in his left cheek. ‘You guys need help
setting it up?’
Jase shook his head. ‘The newbies are in charge of that.’
He glanced over at me, and I thought for a second that
he’d ask if I was coming. ‘I’ve got a few things to take care
of here ﬁrst and then I’m heading back home.’
The stinging disappointment rose swiftly, mixing with
the burn in my throat. I opened my mouth, but immediately
snapped it shut. What could I say in front of my brother?
A small hand tugged on the hem of my shirt and I looked
down, into gray eyes that were both young and soulful.

‘Hi,’ Jack said.
My lips stretched into a small grin. ‘Hi to you.’
‘You’re pretty,’ he said, blinking.
‘Thank you.’ A little laugh escaped me. It was ofﬁcial. I
liked this kid. ‘You’re very handsome.’
Jack beamed. ‘I know.’
I laughed again. This boy was deﬁnitely Jase’s little
 brother.
‘All right, that’s enough, Casanova.’ Jase ﬁnished off the
tea and tossed it into a nearby garbage can. ‘Stop hitting
on the girl.’
He ignored Jase, sticking out his hand. ‘I’m Jack.’
I took the little hand in mine. ‘I’m Teresa. Cam’s my
 brother.’
Jack motioned me down with his chubby ﬁnger and
whispered, ‘Cam doesn’t know how to saddle a horse.’
I glanced over at the boys. They were talking about the
party, but Jase was watching us. Our gazes collided, and
like he’d been doing ever since I started at Shepherd, he
 broke eye contact with a distressing level of quickness.
A pang of frustration lit up my chest as I returned my
attention to Jack. ‘Want to know a secret?’
‘Yeah!’ His smile grew big and broad.
‘I don’t know how to saddle a horse either. And I’ve
never even ridden one before.’
His eyes grew as wide as the moon. ‘Jase!’ he bellowed,
spinning toward his brother. ‘She’s never ridden a horse
 before!’
Well, there went my secret.
Jase glanced at me, and I shrugged. ‘It’s true. They scare
the crap out of me.’
‘They shouldn’t. They’re pretty chill animals. You’d prob-
ably like it.’
‘You should show her!’ Jack rushed up to Jase,

practically latching himself onto his pants legs. ‘You could
teach her like you teached me!’
My heart lurched in my chest, partially at the proposition
of Jase teaching me anything and due to my fear of those
dinosaurs. Some people feared snakes or spiders. Or ghosts
or zombies. I feared horses. Seemed like a legit fear consid-
ering a horse could stomp you to death.
‘It’s “taught” not “teached,” and I’m sure Tess has got
 better things to do than ride around on a horse.’
Tess
. I sucked in a breath. It was his nickname for me—
the
only person who ever called me that, but I didn’t mind it.
Not at all. While Jack demanded to know why I had told
him my name was Teresa and Jase explained that Tess was
a nickname, I was sucked back into the memory of the last
time he’d called me that.
‘You have no idea what you make me want,’ he said, his lips
brushing my cheek, sending shivers down my spine. ‘You have no
 fucking clue, Tess.’
‘Mind if I use the john before we get out of here? I’ve
got to get back,’ Cam said. ‘I promised Avery dinner before
the party.’
‘I’ll show you,’ announced Jack, grabbing Cam’s hand.
Jase arched a dark brow. ‘I’m sure he knows where the
 bathroom is.’
‘It’s okay.’ Cam waved him off. ‘Come on, little bud, lead
the way.’
The two of them headed off toward the farmhouse, and
we were ofﬁcially alone. A hummingbird took ﬂight in my
chest, bouncing around like it was going to peck its way
out of me as a warm breeze picked up, stirring the hairs
that had escaped my ponytail.
Jase watched Cam and Jack jog over the patchy green
grass like a man watching the last life preserver being taken
as the
Titanic 
 started to sink. Well, that was sort of offensive,

as if being alone with me was equivalent to drowning while
 being nom nom’d on by cookie cutter sharks.
I folded my arms across my chest, pursing my lips.
Irritation pricked at my skin, but his obvious discomfort
smarted like a bitch. It hadn’t always been like this. And
it deﬁnitely had been better between us, at least up until
the night he’d kissed me.
‘How’s the leg?’
The fact that he’d spoken startled me, and I stuttered,
‘Uh, it’s not too bad. Barely hurts anymore.’
‘Cam told me about it when it happened. Sorry to hear
that. Seriously.’ He paused, squinting as the line of his jaw
tightened. ‘When can you get back to dancing?’
I shifted my weight. ‘I don’t know. I hope soon, as long
as my doctor clears me. So ﬁngers crossed.’
Jase’s brows knitted. ‘Fingers are crossed for you. Still,
it sucks. I know how much dancing means to you.’
All I could do was nod, affected more than I should’ve
 been by the genuine sympathy in his voice.
His gray eyes ﬁnally made their way back to mine, and
I sucked in a breath. His eyes . . . they never failed to stun
me into stupidity or make me want to do crazy-
insane
things. Right now his eyes were a deep gray, like thunder-
clouds.
Jase wasn’t happy.
Thrusting a hand through his damp hair, he exhaled
deeply. A muscle in his jaw began to tick. The irritation
inside me turned into something messy, causing the burn
in the back of my throat to move up to my eyes. I had to
keep telling myself that he didn’t know— that there was no
way he could’ve known and that the way I was feeling,
the hurt and the brutal wound of rejection, wasn’t his fault.
I was just Cam’s little sister; the reason why Cam had gotten
into so much trouble almost four years ago and why Jase

had started making the trip to our home every weekend.
I was just a stolen kiss. That was all.
I started to turn, to go wait in the truck for Cam before
I did something embarrassing, like crying all over myself.
My emotions had been all over the place since I injured
my leg, and seeing Jase wasn’t helping.
‘Tess. Wait.’ Jase crossed the distance between us in one
step with his long legs. Stopping close enough that his worn
sneakers almost brushed my toes, he reached out toward
me, his hand lingering by my cheek. He didn’t touch me,
 but the heat from his hand branded my skin. ‘We need to
talk.’
