COMMAND AUTHORITY

Present day The black Bronco shot through the storm, its tires kicking up mud and water and grit as it raced along the gravel road, and rain pelted the windshield faster than the wipers could clear it. As the truck charged along at sixty miles an hour, the back doors opened and two armed men climbed out and into the rain, one on each side. The men stood on the running boards and held on to the door frame with gloved hands. Their eyes were protected from the mud and flying rocks and water by large goggles, but their black Nomex suits and the submachine guns around their necks were wet and mud­splattered in moments along with the rest of their gear: helmets with integrated headsets, ballistic protection on their chests and backs, knee and elbow pads, and magazine pouches. Everything was soaked and caked with mud by the time the Bronco closed on a cabin in the center of a rain­swept pasture. The vehicle decelerated quickly, skidding to a stop just twenty feet from the front door. The two men on the running boards leapt off and raced toward the building, their weapons scanning the trees all around, searching for any targets. The driver of the Bronco joined soon after; just like the others, he carried an H&K submachine gun with a fat silencer on the end of the barrel. The three operators formed in a tight stack near the entrance, and the man in front reached forward and tried the door latch. It was locked. 
The man in the back of the stack-the driver-stepped forward now, without a word.He let his H&K drop free on his chest, and he reached behind his back and pulled a pistol-grip shotgun from his pack. The weapon was loaded with Disintegrator breaching rounds: three-inch magnum shells with fifty-gram projectiles made of a steel powder bound by plastic. The operator placed the barrel of the shotgun six inches from the top hinge of the door, and he fired a Disintegrator directly into the hinge. With an enormous boom and a wide blast of flame, the steel powder load slammed into the wood, blowing the hinge from the door frame. He fired a second round into the lower hinge, then kicked the door, which fell into the room beyond. The shotgunner stepped to the side and the two men holding automatic weapons rushed into the dark room, guns up and weapon lights burning arcs in the black. The driver restowed his shotgun, grabbed his H&K, and joined up with the others in the room. Each man had a sector to clear and did so quickly and efficiently. In three seconds they began moving toward a hallway that led to the rear of the cabin. Two open doorways were in front of them now, one on each side of the hall, with a closed door down at the end. The first and second men in the train peeled away; number one went left through the doorway, and number two went into the room on the right. Both men found targets and fired; 
suppressed rounds thumped loudly in the confined space of the cabin. While the first two men were engaging in the rooms, the lone man still in the hallway kept his weapon trained on the door ahead, knowing full well he would be exposed from behind if anyone entered the cabin from the outside. Quickly the two men returned to the hallway and aimed their guns forward, and the man at the rear turned around to check behind them. A second later they moved on to the closed door. They stacked up again, and the first man quietly checked the latch. It was unlocked, so he paused only long enough to lower his body a few inches while his mates did the same. Then the three men moved in as a team, and the lights under the three guns swept their sectors. They found their precious cargo in the center of the unlit space.John Clark sat in a chair, his hands in his lap, squinting straight into the bright lights. Inches from him on both his left and his right, the tactical lights illuminated two figures standing, and a partial face of a third man was just visible behind Clark's own head. The three gunmen in the doorway-Domingo Chavez, Sam Driscoll, and Dominic Caruso-all fired simultaneously. Short bursts from their weapons cracked in the room, flashes erupted from their muzzles, and the scent of gun smoke replaced the dank smell of mold in the cabin. John Clark did not move, did not even blink, as the hullets slammed into the three figures around him. Holes appeared in the foreheads of the targets, but the figures did not fall. They were wooden stands, upon which photorealistic images of armed men had been attached. Quickly the tactical lights scanned the rest of the room independently, and one of them centered on fourth and fifth figures, positioned next to each other in a far corner. The wooden target on the left was the image of a man with adetonator in his hand.Ding Chavez double-tapped this target in the foreheadA second light swept to the corner and illuminated theimage of a beautiful young woman holding an infant in herright arm. In her left hand, low and partially hidden behindher leg, she held a long kitchen knife.Without a moment's hesitation, Dom Caruso shot thefemale target in the foreheadSeconds later a call came from across the room. "Clear,"Driscoll said."Clear," Caruso repeated."We're clear," Ding confirmedJohn Clark stood up from his chair in the center of theroom, rubbing his eyes after catching the full intensity ofthree zoo-lumen tactical lights. "Make your weapons safe.Each of the three operators thumbed the safety of his MPSon and let his weapon hang freely from his chest.Together the four men surveyed the holes in the fivetargets and then headed outside the room and checked thetargets in the rooms off the hall. They stepped outside of thedark cabin, where they stood together on the porch to stayout of the rain."Thoughts, Ding?" Clark asked.Chavez said, “It was fair. It slowed things down when I had to catch up to the guys so we could stack up at the door. But any way we roll this, if we want to breach with at least threeoperators, we're going to have to wait on the driver."Clark conceded the point. "That's true. What else?"Caruso said, "When Ding and Sam engaged in the rooms ofthe hall, I was on my own. I covered the space we hadn'tcleared yet, which was the doorway at the end of the hall, butI couldn't help thinking it would have been nice to have onemore man to check six. Any hostiles who entered from theoutside would have had an open shot at the back of my head. I
kept my head on a swivel, but it's not the same as having
another gun in the fight."
Clark nodded. "We are a small force."
"Smaller now withoutJackJunior," Dom Caruso added.
Driscoll said, "We might want to think about bringing
someone new into the unit."
"Jack will be back," Chavez replied. "You know as well as I
do that as soon as we reactivate he won't be able to stay
away."
"Maybe so," said Dom. "But who knows when that will
happen."
Clark said, "Be patient, kid," but it was clear to the others
on the porch that Clark himself was champing at the bit to do
something more impactful with his time. He was a warrior,
he'd been in the middle of most every conflict the United
States had been involved in for more than forty years, and
although he'd retired from active operations with The
Campus, he was clearly ready to do more than train.
Clark looked out off the porch at the Bronco now; its doors
were wide open, and the storm had only increased in
intensity. By now the floorboards would have an inch of
standing water, and the torn fabric upholstery would be
waterlogged. "Glad I told you to use the farm truck."
Ding said, "It needed a good interior detailing."
The men laughed.
"All right. Back to work," Clark said. "You guys head back
up the road, wait twenty minutes, and then try again. That
will give me time to rehang the front door and move the
configuration around. Dom, your grouping on the second
target in the bedroom could have been a little tighter."
"Roger that," Dom said. He'd fired his MPS three times at
target two, and all three rounds had struck the target's head
within two and a half inches of one another, but he wasn't
going to argue the point with Clark. Especially since all of
Driscoll's and Chavez's targets had sub-two-inch groupings.
"And Sam," Clark said. "I'd like to see you breach the door
a little lower. If you can get your head down another three
inches as you enter, it could mean the difference between
catching a round to the forehead and just getting a haircut."
"Will do, Mr. C."
Dom started to head off the porch, but he looked out at the
weather. "No chance we are going to wait for the rain to stop
before trying this again ?"
Ding walked straight out into the mud and stood under the
heavy downpour. "I had a drill instructor back at Fort Ord, an
Alabama redneck but a hell of a DI, who liked to say, 'If it ain't
rainin', you ain't trainin'. '"
Clark and Dom laughed, and even Sam Driscoll, the quietest
of the bunch, cracked a smile.
The Russian Federation invaded its sovereign neighbor on the
first moonless night of spring. By dawn their tanks ground
westward along highways and back roads as if the
countryside belonged to them, as if the quarter-century thaw
from the Cold War had been a dream.
This was not supposed to happen here. This was Estonia,
after all, and Estonia was a NATO member state. The
politicians in Tallinn had promised their people that Russia
would never attack them now that they had joined the
alliance.
But so far, NATO was a no-show in this war.
The Russian ground invasion was led by T-90s-fully
modernized fifty-ton tanks with a 125-millimeter main gun
and two heavy machine guns, explosive-reactive armor, and a
state-of-the-art automated countermeasure system that
detected inbound missiles and then launched missiles of its
own to kill them in midair. And behind the T-90 warhorses,
BTR-80 armored transporters carried troops in their bellies,
disgorging them when necessary to provide cover for the
tanks, and then retrieving them when all threats had been
neutralized.
So far, the land war was proceeding nominally for the
Russian Federation.
But it was a different story in the air.
Estonia had a good missile defense system, and Russia's
attack on their early-warning systems and SAM sites had
been only marginally successful. Many SAM batteries were
still operational, and they had shot down more than a dozen
Russian aircraft and kept dozens of others from executing
their missions over the nation.
The Russians did not yet own the skies, but this had not
slowed down their land advance at all.
In the first four hours of the war, villages were flattened,
towns lay in rubble, and many of the tanks had yet to fire
their main guns. It was a rout in the making, and anyone who
knew anything about military science could have seen it
coming, because the tiny nation of Estonia had focused on
diplomacy, not on its physical defense.
Edgar Nolvak had seen it coming, not because he was a
soldier or a politician-he was a schoolteacher-but he had
seen it coming because he watched television. Now as he lay
in a ditch, bloody and cold, wet and shaking from fear, his
ears half destroyed from the sustained crashing of detonating
shells fired from the Russian tanks poking out of the tree line
on the far side of the field, he retained the presence of mind
to wish like hell his country's leaders had not wasted time
with diplomacy in Brussels, and had instead spent their time
constructing a fucking wall to keep the fucking Russians out of
his fucking village.
There had been talk of an invasion for weeks, and then,
days earlier, a bomb exploded over the border in Russia,
killing eighteen civilians. On the television the Russians
blamed the Estonian Internal Security Service, a preposterous
claim given credence by Russia's slick and state-sponsored
media. They showed their manufactured proof and then the
Russian president said he had no choice but to order a
security operation into Estonia to protect the Russian people.
Edgar Nolvak lived in Polva; it was forty kilometers from
the border, and he'd spent his youth in the seventies and
eighties fearing that someday tanks would appear in that
very tree line and shell his home. But over the past twentythree
years that fear had been all but forgotten.
N ow the tanks were here, they' d killed scores of his fellow
townspeople, and they would surely kill him with barely a
pause on their way west.
Edgar had gotten a call two hours earlier from a friend who
lived in Voukiila, several kilometers to the east. His friend
was hiding in the woods, and in a voice flat and detached
from shock he told Edgar the Russian tanks had rolled on past
his village after firing only a few shells, as there was nothing
in Voukiila except for some farmhouses and a gas station. But
behind the tanks and the soldiers in the armored personnel
carriers, just minutes behind them, in faet, a force of
irregulars came in pickup trucks, and they were now
systematically burning and pillaging the town.
At that moment Edgar and the other men with him here
sent their families away, and then, bravely or foolishly, they'd
taken their rifles into the ditch to wait for the armor to pass
and for the irregulars to appear. They could do nothing to
stop the tanks, but they would not let their village be burned
to the ground by Russian civilians.
This plan evaporated the instant a half-dozen tanks broke
off the main force moving up the highway, formed a picket
line in the trees, and then began pounding Polva with high explosive
rounds.
This was Edgar's childhood nightmare come to life.
Edgar and the men with him had vowed to fight to the
death. But then the tanks came; this was no fight.
This was just death.
The schoolteacher had been wounded almost immediately.
As he moved from one position to another he'd been caught
in the open as a round hit the high school's parking lot.
Shrapnel from an exploding station wagon had sliced through
his legs, and now he lay in the mud on his rifle, waiting for
the end.
Edgar Nolvak did not know much about military things, but
he was sure that at the pace they were moving, the Russians
would be in the city ofTartu, to the north of his village, by
midafternoon.
A sound like paper tearing filled the air. He'd been listening
to this sound for an hour, and he knew it meant incoming
fire. He pressed his face back into the cold mud.
Boom!
Behind him, a direct hit on the gymnasium of the high
school. The aluminum-and-cinder-block walls blew out ahead
of a billowing cloud; the wood flooring of the basketball court
rained down in splinters over Edgar.
He looked again over the edge of the ditch. The tanks were
only a thousand meters to the east.
"Where the fuck is NATO?''
One thousand meters away, Captain Arkady Lapranov stood
in the open hatch of his tank, Storm Zero One, and shouted,
"Where the fuck is my air cover?"
It was a rhetorical question; the commanders of the five
other tanks he controlled heard it but did not respond, and
the two men in his vehicle, the driver and the gunner, waited
silently for orders. They knew there were helicopter gunships
they could call forward if any air threats appeared, but so far
they' d seen no sign of Estonian aircraft, nor had the Russian
airborne warning and control system detected any aircraft in
the area on radar.
The skies were clear.
This was a good day. A tanker's dream.
A thousand meters away the cloud of dust and smoke over
the gymnasium settled enough so that Lapranov could see
behind it. Into his mike he said, "I want more rounds in that
building beyond the previous target. HE-FRAG. Without
proper air support I am not moving forward on that road
until I can see what's to the right of the intersection."
"Yes, sir!" Lapranov's gunner shouted from below.
The gunner pressed a button, and the autoloader computer
chose a high-explosive-fragmentation round from the
magazine, and its mechanical arm chambered it. The gunner
used his video-viewing device to find the building, then put
his forehead against the rubber pad on the sight panel and
aimed his crosshairs on target. He pushed the fire button on
the control panel, and then, with a violent lurch, the 125-
millimeter smoothbore gun launched a shell through the blue
sky, across the fallow field in front of them, and directly into
the building.
"Hit," said the gunner.
They had been proceeding like this all morning. So far they
had moved through four villages, shelling hig targets with
their 125-millimeter gun and raking small targets with their
coaxial machine guns.
Lapranov had expected more resistance, but he was
starting to allow for the faet that Russia's president, Valeri
Volodin, had been right. Volodin had told his nation NATO
would have no stomach to fight for Estonia.
In his headset, Lapranov heard a transmission from one of
the tanks under his command.
"Storm Zero Four to Storm Zero One."
"Go, Zero Four."
"Captain, I have movement in a ditch in front of the last
target. Range one thousand. I see multiple dismounts."
Lapranov looked through his binoculars, scanning slowly
across the ditch.
There. Heads popped up out of the mud, then disappeared
again. "I see them. Small-arms position. Don't waste a onetwenty-
five. We'll dean them up with the coax when we get
doser."
"Roger."
Another salvo was fired into the buildings on a low hill
beyond the intersection, and Lapranov scanned through his
optics. The town was deathly quiet; there was virtually no
resistance.
"Keep firing," he ordered, then he knelt back down into his
commander's station to get a pack of cigarettes and a lighter.
"Wipe this place off the map."
Seconds la ter, another transmission came through his
headset: "Storm Zero Two to Storm Zero One."
"Go," Lapranov said as he lit his smoke.
"Movement to the south of the hospital. I ... I think it is a
vehide."
Lapranov dropped his lighter back inside and looked
through his binoculars. It took a moment to find the area; the
hospital was a few kilometers beyond the high school, on a
small hill. But he scanned to the south of the building and
finally he saw the movement on the road in the shadows.
At first he thought he was looking at a jeep, or maybe an
suv.
Another T-90 called in. "Storm Three to Storm One. I think
it's a helicopter."
"Nyet," said Lapranov, but he looked doser. The dark
vehide seemed to stop at an intersection, then began moving
laterally into a parking lot.
"What the fu.ck?" Lapranov said. "Maybe it is a helo.
Gunner, can you ID it through your Catherine?" The
Catherine long-range fire-control thermal imager built into
each tank allowed the gunner to see distant targets on a video
screen. Lapranov himself had access to a Catherine screen,
but he'd have to sit down inside the turret for that, and he
was having too much fun up here.
The gunner came over Storm Zero One's intercom.
"Confirmed light helicopter. Single rotor. Can't make out
markings-he is behind a truck in the shade. Shit, he is low.
His skids must be just a meter aboveground."
"Armament?" Lapranov asked. He squinted into his
binoculars to get a better view himself.
"Um ... wait. He has twin pylons with machine guns. No
missiles." The gunner chuckled. "This guy wants to come out
and play against us with his pop guns?"
Lapranov heard a commander of one of the other tanks on
the net laughing.
But the captain did not laugh. He took a long drag on his
cigarette. "Designate it as a target."
"Roger. Designated as a target."
"Range to target?"
"Four thousand two hundred fifty meters."
"Shit," Lapranov said.
The effective range of the 9M119 Refleks missile system,
used against tanks as well as low and slow aircraft like
helicopters, was four thousand meters. This small helo
hovered just out of range.
"Where is my air support? They should have seen this
fucker on radar."
"They won't see his signature. He's moving between the
buildings. Too low to the ground. He must have flown over
the hill through the entire town like that to stay off radar.
Whatever the hell he's doing, he's a good pilot."
"Well, I don't like him. I want him dead. Call in some
support. Pass on his coordinates."
"Da, Captain."
"All Storm units, load HE-FRAG and resume the attack."
"Da!"
Within seconds, all six tanks fired 125-millimeter main gun
rounds into the buildings at the center of Polva, killing four
and injuring nineteen with this single salvo.
Edgar Nolvak heard the shells tear through the sky overhead,
and he looked back over his shoulder in time to see them
impact against the city hall and the bus station. When the
smoke cleared, he noticed a vehicle moving along a road,
higher on the hillside. At first he thought it was a black or
green SUV; it even seemed to stop in a parking lot. It was
difficult to see because it was shaded by the big hospital
building next to it, but eventually Edgar realized what it was.
It was a black helicopter. Its skids were no more than one
or two meters above the ground.
The man lying next to him in the mud grabbed Edgar by
the arm. He pointed at the helicopter and shouted
hysterically. "They are behind us! They are attacking from
the west!"
Edgar stared at the helicopter, unsure. Finally he said, "It's
not Russian. I think it is a news helicopter."
"They are filming this? They are just going to watch us
die?"
Edgar looked back to the tanks as another shell came
crashing down, hittingjust sixty meters from the ditch where
he lay. Mud rained down on him and the others. "They are
going to die themselves if they don't get the hell out of here."
Lapranov was enjoying his cigarette. As he took a long drag, a
transmission came through on the net. "Storm Zero Four to
Storm Zero One."
"Go, Four."
"Sir, looking at that helo again on the Catherine ... there
seems to be some sort of a pod above the main rotor."
"A what?"
"A pod, sir."
Upon hearing the last transmission, Lapranov dropped
down into the commander's compartment and looked at his
own Catherine long-range monitor. He could see the helo
better now. Yes. There was a round device on top of the main
rotor shaft of the little aircraft.
"What the hell is-"
The cigarette fell from his mouth.
oh, shit.
Lapranov had studied the silhouette of every aircraft flown
by every NATO force. Softly, he said, "That's ... that's an OH-
58."
The driver in Storm Zero One came over the net. "Negative,
sir. The Estonians don't have-"
Lapranov shouted into his mike now as he launched
upward, frantically grabbing at the hatch handle so he could
pull his turret hatch shut. "It's the fu.cking Americans!"
Chief Warrant Officer Two, Eric Conway, U.S. Army, Bravo
Troop, 2nd Squad, 17th Cavalry Regiment of the 101st
Airborne Division, glanced down at his multifunction display
and looked at the thermal image of Russian tanks in the trees
more than two miles away. Then he returned his attention to
his blades above. The tips of the four main rotor blades of the
OH-58D Kiowa Warrior spun perilously close to the walls of
buildings on either side of the street. If he did not hold his
cyclic perfectly steady he would strike one of the buildings
and send his helo spinning and crashing, and his own poor
flying would kill him and his copilot even before the Russian
tanks got their chance.
Satisfied he was steady, he blew out a long breath to calm
himself, then spoke through his intercom. "You ready,
dude?"
His copilot, CW2 Andre Page, rep lied calmly, "'Bout as
ready as I'm gonna get."
Conway nodded, then said, "Lase target."
"Roger. Spot on."
Quickly Conway keyed his mike to broadcast on the fires
net. "Blue Max Six Six, Black WolfTwo Six. Target lased."
Four full miles beyond the OH-58D Kiowa Warrior, hidden
behind the relative safety of a forested hill, two massive
Apache Longbow attack helicopters hovered low over a
pasture just north of the village of Aarna. The flight leader,
Blue Max Six Six, received the transmission from the scout
helo at the same time his copilot/gunner, seated in front of
and below him, saw the laser spot tracker on his
multifunction display indicating a laser fix on the first target,
several miles away.
"Roger, Black WolfTwo Six. Good laser. Stand by for
remote Hellfire mission."
The Kiowa Warrior scout helo hovering over the town of
Polva was not heavily armed. But its power was not in its
onboard stores; rather, its power came from its ability to find
and fix targets for the big Apache gunships behind it. This
was VCAS, very close air support, and CW2 Conway and his
copilot had taxed their skills to the limit by, essentially,
driving their helo through the village to stay off enemy radar
so they could get into position to scout for the Apaches.
"Roger, Blue Max Six Six. We're gonna need to hurry this
up. We are out in the open."
In the tree line, the commander of the tank on the northern
flank of Lapranov's squadron shouted into his microphone:
"Storm Zero One, this is Storm Zero Six. Laser warning!"
"Shit!" Lapranov muttered into his headset. The little
helicopter in the distance may not have been armed with
missiles of its own, but it was, apparently, designating targets
for some unseen aircraft.
"Arena systems on!" he commanded.
The T-90's Arena countermeasure system used Doppler
radar to detect an inbound threat to the tank. As soon as the
attacking projectile was within range, the Arena-equipped
tank would fire a defensive rocket designed to close to within
two meters of the missile before exploding, destroying the
threat.
Lapranov next said, "This helo is spotting for Apaches or
jets. Where is my air cover?"
The commander of Storm Zero Five answered back:
"Inbound in ten minutes."
Lapranov slammed his fist into the wall of his commander's
console. "All tankers, load Refleks."
The 9M119 Refleks guided missile round was designed to
fire from the main gun, then "grow" fins and race toward its
target. It would take the six gunners upward of thirty seconds
to unload the high-explosive shell already chambered in the
main gun and then have the autoloader replace it with a
Refleks.
Storm Zero Two said, "Target is beyond effective range,
sir."
Lapranov shouted, "Just do it, damn you!" He hoped like
hell firing all six missiles at the little Kiowa Warrior on the
hill would force the American chopper to break its laser
targeting sequence long enough for the Storm tanks to get
back into the cover of the forest.
Four miles due west, hovering north of the village of Aarna,
the two Apache Longbows each carried eight Hellfire missiles.
On command from the flight lead, both gunners launched. As
the Hellfires flashed through the blue sky toward an unseen
target in the east, the Apache lead transmitted to the scout
helo in Polva.
"Be advised, Black Wolf Two Six. Multiple Hellfires off the
rails and inbound, target Alpha."
In Storm Zero One, Captain Arkady Lapranov saw the
streaking blip on his Catherine. He knew it was heading to
Zero Six, as that was the tank whose laser indicator alarm had
sounded.
The first Hellfire missile appeared above the hill as a tiny
quivering spark of light. On the backdrop of blue sky, there
was no perspective to show it was approaching for several
seconds, but then it angled down toward the tree line.
Storm Zero Six's automatic Arena system saw the incoming
Hellfire missile, and it launched a rocket to defend itself from
it. Fifty meters from impacting the tank, the Hellfire
exploded, sending metallic shrapnel all through the trees.
The Arena worked once, but the second inbound Hellfire
came too quickly behind, before the Arena could reset and
reacquire the new target. The missile slammed into Storm
Zero Six's turret before the system could launch another
defensive rocket.
Lapranov was inside the commander's station of his tank
with his hatch closed, and Zero Six was one hundred twenty
meters to the north of him, but still the explosion sent pieces
of metal pinging off the hull of his tank.
A second tank, Storm Zero Two, fired two Arena defensive
rounds a moment later, and it managed to survive two
inbound Hellfires. As the second missile was destroyed in
front of Zero Two, Storm Zero Five announced it was now
being painted by a laser beam.
Zero Five disintegrated a moment later.
Lapranov gave up on the Refleks missiles; the four
remaining tanks' autoloaders were still in the process of
selecting the right projectile from the magazine.
Lapranov shouted, "Fire smoke and disengage!" to all
Storm units, and then in his own intercom, "Driver, get us out
of here! Back! Back! Back!"
"Da, Captain!"
In the Kiowa Warrior hovering four feet above the ground in
Polva, Eric Conway and Andre Page watched while the four
remaining tanks began pulling back away from the town,
trying to get into the cover of the trees. A dozen huge bursts
of white smoke all around them shrouded them in a puffy
cloud.
Page said, "They're popping smoke and bugging out."
Conway spoke calmly into his mike: "Change polarity."
"Roger," answered Page, and he switched his thermal
imaging system from white hot to black hot.
On the screen in front of them, the four tanks hiding in the
wide cloud suddenly appeared as plain as day.
In Conway's headset he heard, "Black WolfTwo Six, be
advised, two more missiles away."
"Keep sending 'em," Conway said.
While Page pointed his laser on the fourth tank from his
left, Conway moved his attention back to his rotor blades.
He'd come left a little; the tips were only six feet from
impacting the second floor of the hospital. He checked the
right side quickly, saw he had a little more clearance over
there, so he smoothly rocked the cyclic to his right and
recentered his helicopter in the parking lot.
In the trees one of the T-90s' countermeasure systems
fired, and small explosions flashed on the TIS image. They
were nothing, however, compared with the massive
detonation of the fifty-ton tank that happened a second later
when the trailing Heilfire slammed into its turret from above.
"Good hit, Blue Max. Target destroyed. New target lased."
"Roger, Black Wolf Two Six. Firing ... missiles off the rails
and inbound."
Lapranov's Storm Zero One was twenty-five meters back in
the trees when the tank's laser warning indicator sounded.
He screamed for the driver to get them deeper in the woods,
and the T-90 shredded a path through the pines as it tried to
retreat.
Moments later, Zero One's own automatic countermeasure
system fired. The captain could do nothing but grab on to the
handholds above him and shut his eyes.
The moment of panic and sheer terror experienced by
Arkady Lapranov did not translate to any empathy for the
men and women in the homes he had blown apart throughout
the morning. He cowered in his commander's control center
and hoped like heil the Arena would save him.
His countermeasures saved him twice, but a third missile
broke through, slammed into the Kontakt-5 explosivereactive
armor, triggering a detonation on the skin designed
to blunt the incoming round's power, but the Heilfire tore
into the steel of the fifty-ton tank like a hullet through flesh.
The three men inside <lied microseconds after the Hellfire
warhead's detonation, the turret of the T-90 fired one
hundred fifty feet straight up, and the vehicle itself was
knocked back like a plastic toy slammed on a concrete
driveway. It exploded, pieces of armor ripped through the
forest, and secondary explosives sent flames and black smoke
billowing into the cold sky.
A minute later CW2 Eric Conway transmitted his battle
damage assessment over the fires net. "Blue Max Six Six,
Black Wolf Two Six. Good hit. I see no further targets."
From behind him, the Apache Longbow lead said, "Roger,
we are RTB."
Conway held his gloved fist high, and Page bumped it with
his own fist, and then Black Wolf Two Six banked to the north
and began both climbing and rotating at the same time. It
picked up horizontal speed and shot over the four-story
hospital on its way back to base.
In the ditch a kilometer or so to the east, Edgar Nolvak had
risen to a sitting position so he could get a better look at the
six smoldering tanks in the tree line.
There was no cheering or celebration in the mud. The men
here only half understood what had just happened, and they
had no way of knowing if the next wave of Russian war
machines was even now rolling through the forest. Still, they
took advantage of the end of the attack. Some ran to their
cars to bring them doser, while others dragged the injured
out of the ditch and toward the parking lot so they could be
transported to the hospital in the civilian vehicles.
Rough, unsure hands grabbed Edgar Nolvak and pulled him
along. He slid through the mud, wincing with the pain in his
legs that was only now becoming apparent, and he said a
silent prayer for his village, for his country, and for the
world, because he had the feeling he was witness today to the
beginning of something very bad.
The battle of Polva was recorded as the first engagement
between NATO and Russia, but by late afternoon a dozen such
incidents had taken place throughout eastern Estonia.
Russia's war plan had hinged on NATO remaining unwilling
or unable to support its member state. Russia's gamble had
failed, and it withdrew from Estonia the next day, claiming
the entire exercise as a success: The country's only intention
had been to root out terrorists in some villages along the
border, and this had been achieved.
Everyone in the West knew, however, that Russia had
wanted to drive all the way to Tallinn, and its failure to do so
was nothing less than a total defeat for Valeri Volodin. It was
clear to all, probably even to Volodin himself, that he had
underestimated the resolve of NATO in general, and the USA
in particular.
But while the celebrations in the West erupted with the
Russian withdrawal, officials in the Kremlin were already
moving on past this setback and working on a new plan to
move its power to the West.
And this plan would be sure to take into account the
danger posed by the United States.
 